UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549 ------------------------ FORM 10-K /X/ ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(D) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 1995 / / TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(D) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 FOR THE TRANSITION PERIOD FROM TO ----------------------------- COMMISSION FILE NUMBER: 0-14278 MICROSOFT CORPORATION (EXACT NAME OF REGISTRANT AS SPECIFIED IN ITS CHARTER) REGISTRANT'S TELEPHONE NUMBER, INCLUDING AREA CODE: (206) 882-8080 SECURITIES REGISTERED PURSUANT TO SECTION 12(B) OF THE ACT: NONE SECURITIES REGISTERED PURSUANT TO SECTION 12(G) OF THE ACT: COMMON STOCK Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reportsrequired to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that theregistrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to suchfiling requirements for the past 90 days. Yes /X/ No / / Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item405 of Regulation S-K is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to thebest of registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statementsincorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to thisForm 10-K. / / The aggregate market value of the common stock held by non-affiliates ofthe registrant as of September 8, 1995 was $34,330,611,220. The number of shares outstanding of the registrant's common stock as ofSeptember 8, 1995 was 589,952,132. DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE Portions of the definitive Proxy Statement dated September 25, 1995 to bedelivered to shareholders in connection with the Annual Meeting of Shareholdersto be held October 27, 1995 are incorporated by reference into Part III.- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 2 MICROSOFT CORPORATION FORM 10-K FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 1995 INDEX 3 PART IITEM 1. BUSINESSGENERAL Microsoft Corporation (the "Company" or "Microsoft") was founded as apartnership in 1975 and incorporated in 1981. Microsoft develops, manufactures,licenses, sells, and supports a wide range of software products, includingoperating systems for personal computers (PCs), workstations, and servers;business and consumer programs for productivity, reference, education, andentertainment; and development tools. Microsoft also markets personal computerbooks and input devices and is engaged in the research and development of onlineand advanced technology software products. Microsoft(R) products are availablefor most PCs, including Intel-type microprocessor-based computers and Applecomputers. Microsoft's business strategy emphasizes the development of a broad line ofmicrocomputer software products for business and personal use, marketed throughmultiple channels of distribution. The Company is divided into four main groups:the Platforms Product Group; the Applications and Content Product Group; theSales and Support Group; and the Operations Group. The Platforms Product Group is comprised of four divisions, eachresponsible for a particular area of platforms software development andmarketing. The Personal Systems Division designs and develops operating systemsand technologies (such as multimedia, user interface, and online browsers) forgeneral and home PC users. The Business Systems Division is responsible forcomputing solutions for corporate and enterprise use, including client-serveroperating systems, networking products, and server and workgroup applications.The Developer Division creates database products, as well as programminglanguage products and software development tools. The Consumer Systems Divisionis developing software products and technologies for use on the emerging publicnetworks, including future interactive television networks, and for creatingadvanced multimedia applications, such as 3D titles. The Applications and Content Product Group has two divisions that createand market productivity programs for PCs and multimedia content titles. Thegroup also includes online systems and research. The Desktop ApplicationsDivision creates productivity applications. The Consumer Division developsproducts designed for the home, school, and small business market, includingmultimedia consumer products and PC input devices. The MSN Division isresponsible for an online and Internet service. Microsoft Research is a researchlab dedicated to creating new technology in support of the Company's vision forthe evolution of personal computing. The Sales and Support Group is responsible for building long-term businessrelationships with customers. This group is organized to serve three customertypes: OEMs (original equipment manufacturers), end users, and organizations.The Sales and Support Group manages the channels that serve those customers.These include the OEM channel and the following geographic channels: U.S. andCanada, Europe, and Other International. The group also provides support for theCompany's products through Product Support Services, Consulting Services, andSolutions Providers. The Operations Group is responsible for managing business operations andoverall business planning. This includes the process of manufacturing anddelivering finished goods, licenses, subscriptions, and fulfillment orders; thepublishing efforts of Microsoft Press; and other corporate functions.PRODUCTS PERSONAL SYSTEMS The Personal Systems Division develops desktop operating systems software,which performs operations such as allocating computer memory, scheduling theexecution of applications software, and managing the flow of information andcommunication among the various components of the PC. The division's primarydesktop operating systems for PCs are: Microsoft Windows(R) 95, MicrosoftMS-DOS(R), Microsoft Windows 3.1, and Microsoft Windows for Workgroups. (Windows3.1 and Windows for Workgroups 3.11 are hereafter referred to collectively as"Windows 3.x.") 1 4 Windows 95: Microsoft's new personal operating system, designed to be thesuccessor to MS-DOS and Windows 3.x, was released commercially on August 24,1995. Windows 95 is a fully integrated, multitasking 32-bit operating system,compatible with mainstream PCs and most Windows 3.x and MS-DOS softwareapplications. Windows 95 was also designed for the next generation ofapplications, games, PCs, and peripherals. MS-DOS: Microsoft MS-DOS is a single-user, single-tasking operating systemdesigned for PCs that utilize Intel microprocessor chips. Since the introductionof MS-DOS in 1981, the Company has enhanced MS-DOS as new technologies havedeveloped and new user needs have arisen. MS-DOS has been preinstalled by OEMson most PCs. Windows 3.1: Microsoft Windows 3.1 is a graphical operating system forMS-DOS-based PCs. Microsoft Windows 3.1 supports high-performance Windows-basedapplications, and offers ease of use and aesthetic appeal, scalable TrueType(R)fonts, built-in multimedia functionality, and straightforward integration intocorporate computing environments. Windows for Workgroups 3.11: Windows for Workgroups 3.11 integrates networkand workgroup functionality directly into the Windows operating system. WithWindows for Workgroups, users can share files, data, and printers, with ease ofaccess and security. BUSINESS SYSTEMS The Business Systems Division is focused on delivering a broad range ofbusiness computing solutions for organizations. The division develops andmarkets an integrated product line of software for creating business solutions,including foundation operating systems for servers and workstations, as well asapplications for business servers. Server applications development is dividedinto the areas of databases, connectivity, systems management, and workgroupapplications. Server software products are marketed separately or as a part ofan integrated family of products, the Microsoft BackOffice(TM). The BackOfficefamily includes the following key products. Windows NT Workstation and Server: Microsoft Windows NT(TM) Workstation isa powerful desktop operating system designed for demanding business needs. It isa 32-bit, multithreaded operating system for mission critical computing whichprovides the same feature and applications programming interface (API) setacross four hardware platforms: Intel, Alpha AXP, MIPS, and Power PC. Theoperating system provides integrated mail and networking with remote access,pre-emptive multitasking, and support for background communication sessions. TheWindows NT Server is designed to be the network foundation for a new generationof business applications. It provides extensive network management features,administration tools, security, and fault tolerance. It is a platform forbusiness critical applications and database, connectivity, system management,and mail servers. SQL Server: Microsoft SQL Server is a high-performance relational databasemanagement system designed specifically for distributed computing. SQL Serversupports the Structured Query Language, which is a commonly used languagethrough which application programs communicate with relational databases. TheCompany provides SQL Server for Windows NT systems. This product is developed inthe Developer Division and marketed as part of BackOffice by the BusinessSystems Division. SNA Server: Microsoft SNA Server is a robust, highly fault-tolerant, andeasy-to-maintain gateway product that connects PC local area networks (LANs)with IBM host systems using SNA protocols. Systems Management Server: Microsoft Systems Management Server is asoftware tool that helps information technology departments centrally managedistributed-computing environments. With Systems Management Server, systemadministrators can distribute and install software to PCs throughout anenterprise, meter software licenses, conduct remote diagnostics, and perform adetailed inventory of hardware and software resources. Mail Server: Microsoft Mail Server for PC networks is a system fordistributing messages and information. It provides administrative utilities formanaging message files, addresses, and mail system 2 5capabilities. Microsoft Mail Server supports users of popular desktop platforms,including Windows 95, Windows 3.x, MS-DOS, Macintosh, and OS/2. Mail: Microsoft Mail for PC networks includes client-access software forWindows 95, Windows 3.x, MS-DOS, Macintosh, and OS/2 platforms. In addition,this workgroup application offers large corporate users support for multiplenetwork environments. A companion product, Microsoft Mail for AppleTalknetworks, is used by companies with Macintosh servers. Microsoft Mail Remote forWindows offers software for remote clients used by travelers or those working athome to stay in touch with the office mail system. Schedule+: Microsoft Schedule+ is a calendar and scheduling program thathelps individuals and groups manage their time and resources. The program cansearch other workgroup members' schedules to determine meeting availabilitytimes, provide invitees the means to accept, decline, or tentatively acceptinvitations to meetings, and automatically notify attendees if a meeting iscanceled or rescheduled. DEVELOPER PRODUCTS The Developer Division provides software development tools, databaseproducts, and technical information to Windows developers worldwide. Theseproducts and services help independent software developers, corporatedevelopers, solutions developers, and hobbyists create a wide variety ofapplications, primarily for Windows 95, Windows 3.x, and Windows NT. Database Products: Database products control the maintenance andutilization of structured data organized into a set of records or files. TheCompany offers database products which span the needs of a wide variety ofusers, from individuals to large corporations. These products include MicrosoftAccess, Microsoft FoxPro(R), Microsoft SQL Server, and a variety of databaseconnectivity technologies. Microsoft Access is a relational database managementapplication, also offered in conjunction with Microsoft Office, which providesaccess to structured business data. Microsoft FoxPro is a desktop databasedevelopment tool which is compatible with the industry standard xBasedevelopment language. FoxPro supports xBase applications on MS-DOS, Windows 3.x,Windows 95, Windows NT, Macintosh, and UNIX. The Open Database Connectivity(ODBC) product provides access and connectivity to read and write to variousdatabases from other computer industry vendors from within Microsoft Windowsapplications. Software Development Tools and Computer Languages: Software developmenttools and computer languages allow software developers to write programs in aparticular computer language and translate programs into a binarymachine-readable set of commands that activate and instruct the hardware. TheCompany develops and markets a number of software development environments,language compilers, and software testing tools. Microsoft Visual C++(TM) is theCompany's development system for 16- and 32-bit application development onWindows 3.x, Windows 95, and Windows NT. The Microsoft Visual Basic(TM)programming system for Windows 95, Windows 3.x, and Windows NT operating systemsprovides easy access to a wide variety of data sources by integrating theMicrosoft Access database engine and the ability to leverage investments incommercial applications through OLE 2.0. Additionally, the Company offersprofessional, highly-integrated development environments in the FORTRAN languagefor MS-DOS, Windows 3.x, and Windows NT. Developer Information Products: The Company provides third party softwaredevelopers with a wide range of technical and support information that assiststhem in developing software products intended to run on Windows 3.x, Windows 95,and Windows NT. Developers subscribe to the Microsoft Developer Network (MSDN)information service and receive periodic updates via CD-ROMs, magazines, andseveral on-line information services. CONSUMER SYSTEMS The Consumer Systems Division is developing advanced system software. Coretechnologies under development include broadband networking and multimediaoperating system architecture, advanced video and graphics, and new authoringsystem technologies for interactive television. The group is also responsible 3 6for the development and marketing activities of the Company's SoftImageproducts, which include authoring and editing systems for film and video. DESKTOP APPLICATIONS SOFTWARE The Desktop Applications Division develops applications software, whichprovides the PC with instructions for the performance of end user tasks. TheCompany's desktop applications software is designed for use by a broad class ofend users, regardless of business, industry, or market segment. Primary examplesof desktop applications software are word processing, spreadsheet, andpresentation graphics programs. The Company's desktop applications programs aredeveloped principally for Windows 95, Windows 3.x, and Macintosh operatingsystems. Microsoft Office: Microsoft Office(R) is a suite of software programsfeaturing seamless integration of the most commonly used desktop applications.Microsoft Office is based upon a document-centric concept, with common commandsand extensive use of object linking and embedding (OLE) cross-applicationcapabilities. Microsoft Office is available in two editions, Standard andProfessional. The Standard Edition includes Microsoft Word, Microsoft Excel, andthe Microsoft PowerPoint(R) presentation graphics program. The Microsoft Officefor Windows 95 version also includes Schedule+, while earlier versions of theStandard Edition included a client-access license for Microsoft Mail. TheStandard Edition is available for Windows 95, Windows 3.x, and Macintoshoperating systems. The Microsoft Office Professional Edition for Windows addsthe Microsoft Access(R) database. Microsoft Word: The Company's principal word processing program isMicrosoft Word. Versions of Microsoft Word for Windows 95 and for Windows 3.xprovide all the features that users of word processing products expect in theWindows graphical environment, plus the ability to handle graphics, tables,spreadsheet data, charts, and images imported from other Windows-based softwareprograms. The Company also has Windows NT and Macintosh versions of MicrosoftWord. Microsoft Excel: The Company's spreadsheet program is Microsoft Excel,which is available for Windows 95, Windows 3.x, Windows NT, and Macintoshoperating systems. It is an integrated spreadsheet with pivot table, database,and business graphics capabilities. Microsoft Excel allows full linking andembedding of objects that permits users to view and edit graphics or charts fromother Windows-based programs from the worksheet in which the object is stored.Microsoft Excel graphics capabilities can be linked to its spreadsheets to allowsimultaneous changes to charts as changes are made to the spreadsheets. Microsoft PowerPoint: Microsoft PowerPoint is a presentation graphicsprogram for producing slides, overheads, transparencies, and prints. The Companymarkets versions of PowerPoint for Windows 95, Windows 3.x, and the Macintosh. Microsoft Project: Microsoft Project is a critical path project schedulingand resource allocation program that runs on Windows 95, Windows 3.x, andMacintosh operating systems. The product can perform as a budgeting, monitoring,and cost estimating tool for large business projects and as a critical path andschedule planning tool. ONLINE SERVICES The MSN Division manages MSN, The Microsoft Network, a new, interactiveonline service. MSN provides easy and inexpensive access for users to a widerange of graphically-rich online content, a compelling business model andplatform for independent content providers (ICPs), and rich and powerfuldevelopment tools. The Microsoft Network: Client-access software for MSN is included as afeature of Windows 95, which was released commercially on August 24, 1995. Theonline service provides access to the Internet, electronic mail, bulletinboards, and myriad additional services offered by Microsoft and by independentcontent providers. The Microsoft Internet Explorer, an Internet browser, takesadvantage of various technical advances in Windows 95 and includes real-timeaudio capabilities. Content and service providers aligned with MSN 4 7have flexibility in creating products and pricing their services, such assubscriptions, online transactions, and ticket events. Services may be supportedby advertising and commerce. MSN is owned by The Microsoft Network, LLC (formerly the Microsoft OnlineServices Partnership). Microsoft owns 80% of the entity and a wholly ownedsubsidiary of Tele-Communications, Inc. (TCI) owns the remaining 20%. CONSUMER PRODUCTS The Microsoft Consumer Division develops and markets useful, enjoyable, andfundamental software and services for small businesses, schools, and homes. Thedivision is developing and managing a synergistic product line focusing on thefollowing categories of consumer usage: Information, Productivity, Kids,Personal Finance, Entertainment, and PC Input Devices. Many of the titles areavailable on CD-ROM. Information: Reference titles include Microsoft Encarta(TM) and MicrosoftBookshelf(R), which are both available for Windows 3.x and Macintosh operatingsystems. The Encarta multimedia encyclopedia database blends text in articleswith a wealth of innovative, interactive information presented throughanimations, videos, maps, charts, sounds, and pictures. Bookshelf is amultimedia reference library that integrates seven well-respected andauthoritative works on one compact disc, including a dictionary, world atlas,world almanac, thesaurus, concise encyclopedia, and two books of quotations. Personal interest titles include Microsoft Cinemania(TM), an interactiveguide to the movies with entries for 19,000 films, Microsoft Dinosaurs, and manymusical titles. Geography and travel products include Automap Road Atlas, a comprehensiveroute-planning program with detailed maps and road information for routes inNorth America. Productivity: The Company's leading consumer productivity products areMicrosoft Works and Microsoft Publisher. The Company markets versions ofMicrosoft Works that run on Windows 95, Windows 3.x, MS-DOS, and Macintoshoperating systems. Microsoft Works is an integrated software program thatcontains basic word processing, spreadsheet, and database capabilities thatallows the easy exchange of information from one tool to another. MicrosoftPublisher is an easy-to-use, entry-level desktop publishing tool for Windows 95and Windows 3.x operating systems. Publisher features an interactive tool thatautomates the design process of 12 custom publications, including newsletters,calendars, greeting cards, and invitations. Kids: Titles for children include Microsoft Creative Writer and MicrosoftFine Artist. Creative Writer is a full-featured creative writing and publishingprogram; Fine Artist is a comprehensive art program. Both products takeadvantage of the computer's ability to integrate text, high-quality graphics,sound, and animation to produce an enriching creative experience for children.The Company also has a series of products based on the popular children's booksand television series, The Magic School Bus. Personal Finance: Microsoft Money is a financial organization product thatallows users to computerize their household finances. Microsoft Money isavailable for systems running Windows 95 and became available August 24, 1995.It is visually appealing, easy to use, and focuses on the financial tasks thatpeople do most often. Microsoft Money provides enhanced online home-bankingservices with 17 different banks in the U.S. Users who are customers ofparticipating banks will be able to pay bills online, access up-to-datestatements and balances, transfer funds, and send email messages and inquiriesto their banks. Entertainment: The Company also has a line of entertainment products.Microsoft Flight Simulator, which was developed by Bruce Artwick OrganizationLtd., is a popular airplane-flying game available for MS-DOS and Macintoshoperating systems. Microsoft Golf, licensed from Access Software, Inc., is arealistic simulation of the sport of golf for Windows 95 and Windows 3.xoperating systems. PC Input Devices: The Company's major input device is the Microsoft Mouse,a hand-held pointing device that facilitates use of a PC. It can be used withMS-DOS, Windows 95, and Windows 3.x operating systems and works with manyapplications products from Microsoft and other companies. The MicrosoftBallPoint(R) Mouse is designed especially for use with laptop and notebookcomputers. The BallPoint Mouse is shipped with a universal clamp that fits onthe keyboards of most laptop computers and a positioner that allows 5 8the user to adjust the angle of the mouse to the keyboard. The Company alsodesigned and markets the Microsoft Natural Keyboard(TM), anergonomically-designed keyboard. MICROSOFT PRESS Microsoft Press publishes books about software products from Microsoft andother software developers and about current developments in the industry. Bookspublished by Microsoft Press typically are written and copyrighted byindependent authors who submit their manuscripts to the Company for publicationand who receive royalties based on net revenues generated by the book. Microsoft Press contracts with an independent commercial printer for themanufacturing of its books. Publisher's Resources, Inc. acts as the Company'smain fulfillment house in the United States, maintaining the majority of theinventory of Microsoft Press books. Books are marketed by independent salesrepresentatives and by Microsoft Press sales personnel. Internationally,Microsoft Press has numerous international agreements with publishers for theworldwide distribution of its books. Microsoft Press has granted a publisher inEngland the right to distribute English language versions of its books in allcountries except the United States, Canada, Central and South America, andcertain Asian countries. In most cases, Microsoft Press provides each publisherwith a book's manuscript, and the publisher arranges for its translation and theprinting, marketing, and distribution of the translated version.PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT The PC software industry is characterized by extremely rapid technologicalchange, which requires a continuous and high level of expenditures for enhancingexisting products and developing new products. The Company is committed tocontinued high expenditures for research and product development. Most of the Company's software products are developed internally. TheCompany also purchases technology, licenses intellectual property rights, andoversees third party development for certain products. Product documentation isalso created internally. Internal development enables Microsoft to maintaincloser technical control over the products and gives the Company the freedom todesignate which modifications and enhancements are most important and when theyshould be implemented. The Company has created a substantial body of proprietarydevelopment tools and has evolved a development methodology for creating andenhancing its products. These tools and methodology are also designed tosimplify a product's portability among different operating systems or computers. The Company believes that a crucial factor in the success of a new productis getting it to market quickly to respond to new user needs or advances inhardware design, without compromising product quality. The Company strives tobecome as informed as possible at the earliest possible time about changingusage patterns and hardware advances that may affect software design. During fiscal years 1993, 1994, and 1995, the Company spent $470 million,$610 million, and $860 million, respectively, on product research anddevelopment activities. Those amounts represented 12.5%, 13.1%, and 14.5%,respectively, of net revenues in each of those years.LOCALIZATION In order to best serve the needs of users in foreign countries, Microsoft"localizes" many of its products to reflect local languages and conventions. InFrance, for example, all user messages and documentation are in French and allmonetary references are in French francs, and in the United Kingdom, monetaryreferences are in British pounds and user messages and documentation reflectcertain British conventions. Various Microsoft products have been localized intomore than 30 languages.MANUFACTURING The Company has manufacturing facilities located in the United States,Puerto Rico, and Ireland. The Company's manufacturing operations involve diskreplication, assembly of purchased parts, and final packaging. Quality controltests are performed on purchased parts, finished disks, and other products. The 6 9chief materials and components used in Microsoft products include disks orCD-ROMs, books, and multicolor printed materials. The Company is often able toacquire component parts and materials on a volume discount basis. The Companyhas multiple sources for raw materials, supplies, and components. The Company contracts a substantial portion of its manufacturing activityto third parties. Outside manufacturers produce various software products,documentation, and hardware such as mouse pointing devices and keyboards. Thereare other custom manufacturers in the event that outsourced manufacturingbecomes unavailable from current sources.MARKETING AND DISTRIBUTION Microsoft aligns its sales and marketing people with three customer types:end users, organizations, and OEMs. The Company's sales and marketing staffseeks to build long-term relationships with these customers of Microsoftproducts. Microsoft has four major channels of distribution which deliverproduct to end users: finished goods in the U.S. and Canada, Europe, and OtherInternational; and OEM. The end user customer unit has responsibility for activities that targetend users who make individual buying decisions for the PCs they use at work orhome. All sales and marketing activities aimed at end user customers areperformed by this unit, including developing and administering distributor andreseller relationships; reseller sales terms and conditions; channel marketingand promotions; end user marketing programs; support policies; and seminars,events, and sales training for resellers. The key products licensed and sold arethe Company's personal operating systems and consumer and desktop applications. The organization customer unit has responsibility for activities thattarget groups of users in organizations of all sizes. The unit works withSolutions Providers, the Microsoft Consulting Services division, and directlywith organizations to create enterprise-wide solutions to business computingproblems. The unit's sales and marketing activities include providing technicaltraining of Solutions Providers and channel resellers; developing supportpolicies; and supporting and providing seminars, events, and sales training forresellers and Solutions Providers. Key products are the Company's businesssystems, developer software, and software sold via volume licensing programs. Inthe U.S., the organization customer unit is further segregated into anenterprise customer unit, which services only large organization customers, anda more specialized unit which services small and medium customers. The OEM customer unit includes the sales force which works with originalequipment manufacturers that include Microsoft software on their PCs. FINISHED GOODS CHANNELS Distributors and Resellers: The Company markets its products in thefinished goods channels primarily through independent non-exclusive distributorsand resellers. Distributors include Computer 2000, Ingram Micro, and Merisel.Resellers include Egghead Software, Softbank, Software Spectrum, and StreamInternational (formerly Corporate Software). Microsoft has a network of fieldsales representatives and field support personnel who solicit orders fromdistributors and resellers and provide product training and sales support. Large Accounts: The Company has a program designed to make it easier forlarge organizations to acquire and maintain Microsoft products. The program,Microsoft Select, offers flexible software acquisition, licensing, andmaintenance options specially designed to meet the needs of large multinationalorganizations. Targeted audiences include technology specialists and influentialend users in large enterprises. Marketing efforts and fulfillment are generallycoordinated with the Microsoft network of large account resellers. Solutions Providers: Microsoft's Solutions Providers program is acomprehensive support relationship with independent organizations that providenetwork and system integration, custom development, training, and technicalsupport for business computing solutions. The program supports value-addedresellers (VARs), system integrators, consultants, and developers, as well astechnical support and training organizations. Under this business partnershipstrategy, the Company provides sales and product information, developmentservices, early access to Microsoft products, and customer support toolsincluding priority telephone support, education, 7 10and business development support. To ensure high-quality technical services forthe Company's products, Microsoft Solutions Providers are required to haveMicrosoft-certified professionals on staff. Consulting Services: The Company's Consulting Services Division assistscustomers in using the Company's computer operating systems, applications, andcommunications products. The group works with Solutions Providers and helpscreate enterprise-wide computing solutions for large corporate accounts. Direct Marketing: Microsoft promotes some of its products through directmarketing techniques directed toward existing and potential users of theCompany's products. Promotional materials are typically delivered through themail, utilizing lists of targeted individuals. Fulfillment of product to the enduser is accomplished by either direct shipment or through resellers. International Sales Sites: The Company has established marketing, support,and/or distribution subsidiaries in Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium,Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, the Czech Republic, Denmark,Ecuador, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong, Hungary, India, Ireland,Israel, Italy, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, the Netherlands, New Zealand,Norway, the People's Republic of China, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal,Puerto Rico, Russia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, South Korea,Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, theUnited Kingdom, and Venezuela. The Company's international operations, both OEM and finished goods, aresubject to certain risks common to foreign operations in general, such asgovernmental regulations, import restrictions, and foreign exchange ratefluctuations. Microsoft hedges a portion of its foreign exchange risk. OEM CHANNEL The Company's operating systems are licensed primarily to OEMs underagreements that grant the OEMs the right to distribute copies of Microsoft'sproducts with their computers. The Company also markets certain language andapplications programs to OEMs under similar arrangements. In addition, theCompany markets the Microsoft Mouse, BallPoint Mouse, and Natural Keyboard toOEMs for distribution to buyers of their computers. In almost all cases, theproducts are distributed under Microsoft trademarks. The Company has OEMagreements covering one or more of its products with virtually all of the majormicrocomputer OEMs, including AST Research, Acer, Digital Equipment Corporation,Dell, Compaq, Gateway 2000, Hewlett-Packard, IBM, NEC, Olivetti, Packard Bell,and Toshiba. ADVERTISING The Company works closely with large advertising and direct marketingfirms. Advertising, direct marketing, worldwide packaging, and marketingmaterials are targeted to various end-user segments. The Company utilizes broadconsumer media (television, radio, and business publications) and tradepublications. Microsoft has programs under which qualifying resellers and OEMsare reimbursed for certain advertising expenditures. Microsoft also investsheavily in direct marketing and customer satisfaction areas. In 1996, theCompany plans to spend more than $150 million on a broad campaign emphasizingthe Microsoft brand identity.CUSTOMERS As described above, Microsoft has three customer types: end users,organizations, and OEMs. Most end users of Microsoft products are individuals inbusinesses, government agencies, educational institutions, and at home. Theseend users obtain Microsoft products primarily through distributors, resellers,and OEMs, which include certain Microsoft products with their hardware. Notes toFinancial Statements describe customers that represent more than 10% of theCompany's revenues. The Company's practice is to ship its products promptly uponreceipt of purchase orders from its customers and, consequently, backlog is notsignificant. 8 11PRODUCT SUPPORT SERVICES The Company's Product Support Services group, with locations in the U.S.and in various Microsoft subsidiaries, provides product support coverage optionsto meet the needs of users of Microsoft products. The Company hires individualswith proven product expertise and provides them with productivity tools,continuous product education and training, and consistent processes to deliverquality support for Microsoft products. Certain telephone support is alsosupplied by qualified third-party support organizations. Coverage options rangefrom standard no-charge toll telephone support to fee-based offerings providingunlimited 800 number telephone and electronic technical support across allMicrosoft products 24 hours per day, 7 days per week. Users have access to Microsoft KnowledgeBase, a library of thousands oftechnical articles that is updated regularly with useful information regardingMicrosoft products. Microsoft provides access to KnowledgeBase via MSN, AmericaOnline, CompuServe(R), GEnie(TM), Prodigy, and the Internet. Additionally, theCompany offers two information subscription services: Microsoft TechNet andMicrosoft Developer Network. As a supplement or alternative to direct support, the Company enhances thethird party support channel by providing Microsoft Solutions Providers witheducation, training, tools, and support. Microsoft Solutions Providers includeAuthorized Training Centers, which offer advanced product education andcertification on Microsoft products; and Authorized Support Centers, whichprovide a wide spectrum of multinational support, multivendor support, andintegration services.COMPETITION The microcomputer software business is intensely competitive and subject toextremely rapid technological change. Microsoft faces formidable competition inall areas of its business activity, including competition from many companieswhose revenues and resources are much larger than Microsoft's. Operating systems. Microsoft's operating systems products face substantialcompetition from a number of sources. Major competitors such as IBM, AppleComputer, Digital Equipment Corporation, and others, which are verticallyintegrated in both software development and hardware manufacture, have developedoperating systems that they preinstall on computers of their own manufacture.Many of these operating system software products are also licensed to thirdparty OEMs for preinstallation on their machines. Microsoft's operating systemsproducts compete with UNIX-based operating systems from a wide range ofcompanies including IBM, AT&T, Hewlett Packard, Sun Microsystems, Novell, TheSanta Cruz Operation, and others. Variants of UNIX run on a wide variety ofcomputer platforms and are gaining increasing acceptance as desktop operatingsystems. As microcomputer technology increasingly moves toward connectivity andcommunications, Microsoft's operating systems products will face increasedcompetition from network server operating systems, such as Novell NetWare, and"middleware" products such as Lotus Notes from IBM. Microsoft's operatingsystems products also face constant competition from software pirates whounlawfully copy and distribute Microsoft's copyrighted software products. Business systems. The Company is a fairly recent entrant intoenterprise-wide computing solutions. As such, competitors enjoy larger marketshares and installed bases. Software developers that provide competing serverapplications include Oracle, Sybase, and Informix. There are also severalsoftware vendors who offer connectivity servers. Additionally, Lotus Development(now owned by IBM) has a large installed base of Lotus Notes and cc:Mail, whichcompete with the Company's workgroup products. Desktop applications. The Company's competitors include many softwareapplication vendors, such as Lotus, Oracle, Claris, and Novell. Some of thecompetitors in this arena do not offer products in every major desktopapplication category (e.g., spreadsheet, word processors, databases, etc.) andas a result may be able to more effectively focus their efforts on enhancingparticular product offerings. Online services. An enormous range of companies, including mediaconglomerates, telephone companies, cable companies, retailers, hardwaremanufacturers, and software developers, are competing to make online serviceswidely available to computer users. Microsoft's new online services network,MSN, faces 9 12formidable competition from both established online networks, such as CompuServe(owned by H&R Block), Prodigy (owned by IBM and Sears), America Online, andothers, and impending entrants, such as a number of new online networks thatwill be offered by AT&T. MSN and other online networks also face competitionfrom online services that are offered to users directly via the Internet,including, in particular, the World Wide Web portion of the Internet.Additionally, Netscape, Adobe, Sun Microsystems, and many other companies offersoftware for Internet servers and for user navigation of the Internet. Developer. The Company's developer products compete against offerings fromSybase, Borland, and many other companies. Consumer. Microsoft's Consumer division faces many smaller but focusedcompetitors, particularly in the areas of entertainment and education. Examplesinclude Intuit, Broderbund, Electronic Arts, Softkey, The Learning Company,Davidson Associates, Voyager, Comptons, Edmark, Sierra On-Line, and DorlingKindersley. Still other competitors own branded content, such as Walt Disney andLucas Arts. Additionally, as platforms become more powerful, PC-based games willcompete head-to-head with games created for proprietary systems such as Nintendoand Sega. The Consumer Division's input devices face substantial competitionfrom computer manufactures, since computers are typically sold with a keyboardand mouse, and other manufacturers of these devices. The Company believes that the principal competitive factors in marketing PCsoftware are the product's reputation, features and functions, ease of use,reliability, price relative to performance, timeliness of delivery, andavailability and quality of support services. There is no assurance that theCompany's competitive position will not be adversely affected by one or more ofthese factors in the future, particularly in view of the fast pace oftechnological change in the software industry.EMPLOYEES As of June 30, 1995, the Company employed 17,801 people, 12,193domestically and 5,608 internationally. Of the total, 5,397 were in productresearch and development, 9,166 in sales, marketing, and support, 1,639 inmanufacturing and distribution, and 1,599 in finance and administration.Microsoft's success is highly dependent on its ability to attract and retainqualified employees. Competition for employees is intense in the softwareindustry. To date, the Company believes it has been successful in its efforts torecruit qualified employees, but there is no assurance that it will continue tobe as successful in the future. None of the Company's employees are subject tocollective bargaining agreements. The Company believes that relations with itsemployees are excellent.ITEM 2. PROPERTIES The Company's corporate offices consist of approximately 2.2 million squarefeet of office building space located in Redmond, Washington. There are twosites that total approximately 300 acres of land. The Company is constructing a225,000 square foot office building, which is expected to be completed in thespring of 1996. Additionally, construction is continuing on another series ofoffice buildings with approximately 685,000 square feet of space. Occupancy onthis site will be phased starting in the fall of 1995 and completed by spring of1996. The Company owns all of its corporate campus. The Company's domestic manufacturing and distribution operation consists ofa 265,000 square foot facility situated on 23 acres in nearby Snohomish County,Washington, and a 45,000 square foot disk duplication facility in Humacao,Puerto Rico. The Puerto Rican facility, which began operation in April 1990, isleased under a 10-year lease, with an option to renew for an additional 10years. The Company's European manufacturing operation consists of a 155,000square foot facility situated on 12 acres in Dublin, Ireland. The Ireland sitealso includes a 25,000 square foot office building for internationallocalization. An additional 80,000 of square feet of office space forlocalization is being constructed in Ireland. The Company owns a 65,000 square foot office building on seven acres ofland plus another 33 acres near London, England. In Les Ulis, France, theCompany owns a 110,000 square foot office building on four acres of land. 10 13 In addition, the Company leases office space in numerous locations in theUnited States and many other countries.ITEM 3. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS See Notes to Financial Statements -- Contingencies.ITEM 4. SUBMISSION OF MATTERS TO A VOTE OF SECURITY HOLDERS No matters were submitted to a vote of security holders during the fourthquarter of fiscal 1995.ITEM E.O. EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF THE REGISTRANT The executive officers of Microsoft as of September 8, 1995 were asfollows: Mr. Gates co-founded Microsoft in 1975 and has been its Chief ExecutiveOfficer and Chairman of the Board since the original partnership wasincorporated in 1981. Mr. Ballmer was named Executive Vice President, Worldwide Sales and Supportin February 1992. He had been Senior Vice President, Systems Software since1989. From 1984 until 1989, Mr. Ballmer served as Vice President, SystemsSoftware. He joined Microsoft in 1980. Mr. Herbold joined Microsoft as Executive Vice President and ChiefOperating Officer in November 1994. Herbold had been with The Procter & GambleCompany since 1968, with experience in information services, advertising andmarket research. Most recently, he was P&G's Senior Vice President, InformationServices and Advertising. Mr. Higgins was named Group Vice President, Applications and Content Groupin May 1995. He was named Senior Vice President, Desktop Applications Divisionin March 1993. He had been Vice President, Desktop Applications Division since1992 and previously, Vice President, Analysis Business Unit since 1991. Mr.Higgins joined Microsoft in 1983. Mr. Maritz was named Group Vice President, Platforms Group in May 1995. Hewas named Senior Vice President, Product and Technology Strategy in November1994 and had been Senior Vice President, Systems 11 14Division since February 1992. He had been Vice President, Advanced OperatingSystems since 1989. Mr. Maritz joined Microsoft in 1986. Mr. Myhrvold was named Group Vice President, Applications and Content Groupin May 1995. He was named Senior Vice President, Advanced Technology in July1993. He had been Vice President, Advanced Technology and Business Developmentsince 1989. Mr. Myhrvold joined Microsoft in 1986. Mr. Allchin was named Senior Vice President, Business Systems Division inNovember 1994. He had been Vice President, Business Systems Division, since July1991. Prior to joining Microsoft in 1991, Mr. Allchin spent seven years atBanyan Systems, Inc., where he held numerous positions, most recently SeniorVice President and Chief Technology Officer. Mr. Heinen joined Microsoft as Senior Vice President, Developer Division inJanuary 1993. He had been Senior Vice President and General Manager of theMacintosh Software Division at Apple Computer, Inc. from 1990 to 1993. Prior to1990, Heinen was a corporate consulting engineer for software at DigitalEquipment Corporation. Mr. Kempin was named Senior Vice President, Worldwide OEM Sales in August1993. He had been Vice President, OEM Sales since 1987. Mr. Kempin had served asGeneral Manager of Microsoft's German subsidiary since its inception in 1983. Mr. Mundie was named Senior Vice President, Consumer Systems Division inMay 1995. He had been Vice President, Advanced Consumer Technology since July1993. He joined Microsoft as General Manager, Advanced Consumer Technology Groupin December 1992. Previously, Mr. Mundie had been CEO of Alliant ComputerSystems Corporation, which declared bankruptcy on May 25, 1992 and wasliquidated. Mr. Neukom was named Senior Vice President, Law and Corporate Affairs inFebruary 1994. He joined Microsoft in 1985 as Vice President. Mr. Neukomformerly was a member of the Seattle law firm of Shidler McBroom Gates & Lucas(now Preston Gates & Ellis), Microsoft's primary outside law firm. Mr. Raikes was named Senior Vice President, Microsoft North America inJanuary 1992. He had been Vice President, Office Systems since 1990. Mr. Raikescame to Microsoft in 1981. Mr. Silverberg was named Senior Vice President, Personal Systems Divisionin November 1994. He joined Microsoft in August 1990 as Vice President, PersonalOperating Systems Division. From 1987 until joining Microsoft, Mr. Silverbergserved as Vice President, Engineering for Borland International, Inc. Ms. Stonesifer was named Senior Vice President, Consumer Division inNovember 1994, after having been Vice President, Consumer Division since June1993. She had been Vice President, Support since 1992 and General Manager ofProduct Support Services since 1991. Previously, she was General Manager ofMicrosoft Canada and before that, General Manager for Microsoft Press. Prior tojoining Microsoft in 1988, Ms. Stonesifer was with Que Corporation, a publisherof books for computer users. Mr. Vergnes is a Senior Vice President of Microsoft and was namedPresident, Microsoft Europe in April 1992. He had been Vice President, Europesince 1989. Mr. Vergnes served as General Manager of Microsoft's Frenchsubsidiary since its inception in 1983. Mr. Brown was named Chief Financial Officer in August 1994 and VicePresident, Finance in April 1993. He had been Treasurer since February 1990,after joining Microsoft in January 1990. Previously, Mr. Brown was a partner inthe accounting firm Deloitte & Touche, Microsoft's independent auditors. 12 15 PART IIITEM 5. MARKET FOR REGISTRANT'S COMMON STOCK AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS The Company's common stock is traded on The Nasdaq Stock Market under thesymbol MSFT. On September 8, 1995, there were 35,643 holders of record of theCompany's common stock. The Company has not paid cash dividends on its commonstock. QUARTERLY FINANCIAL AND STOCK PRICE INFORMATION (IN MILLIONS, EXCEPT PER SHARE DATA) 13 16ITEM 6. SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS (IN MILLIONS, EXCEPT EARNINGS PER SHARE)ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONSRESULTS OF OPERATIONS FOR 1993, 1994, AND 1995 Microsoft develops, manufactures, licenses, sells, and supports a widerange of software products, including operating system platforms for personalcomputers (PCs), workstations, and servers; business and consumer applicationsfor productivity, reference, education, and entertainment; and developmenttools. Microsoft also sells personal computer books and input devices, and isengaged in the research and development of online and advanced technologysoftware products. NET REVENUES Microsoft's net revenues grew 24% in the fiscal year ended June 30, 1994and 28% in fiscal year 1995. Software license volume (as opposed to price)increases have been the principal factor in Microsoft revenue growth. Theaverage selling price per license has decreased, primarily because of generalshifts in the sales mix from retail packaged products to licensing programs,from new products to product upgrades, and from stand-alone desktop applicationsto integrated product suites. Average revenue per license from originalequipment manufacturer (OEM) licenses and corporate license programs, such asMicrosoft Select, is lower than average revenue per license from retailversions. Likewise, product upgrades have lower prices than new products. Also,prices of integrated suites, e.g., Microsoft Office, are less than the sum ofthe prices for the individual programs included in these products when suchprograms are licensed separately. Product groups. Microsoft has a platforms product group and an applicationsand content product group. Platforms product group revenues were $1.52 billion, $1.83 billion, and$2.36 billion in 1993, 1994, and 1995. Principal personal systems products have been the MS-DOS and MicrosoftWindows operating systems. MS-DOS is preinstalled on PCs by most OEMs, andrevenues from such licenses increased steadily in both 1994 and 1995. Revenuesfrom retail upgrade versions of MS-DOS decreased in both 1994 and 1995 after astrong increase in 1993 when the MS-DOS 6 Upgrade was released. There were nomajor upgrades of MS-DOS in 1994 or 1995. The Microsoft Windows operating systemwas an increasingly strong contributor to revenues as the number of new PCspreinstalled with Windows increased rapidly during the three-year period.Windows units licensed to new users were 15 million, 30 million, and 40 millionin 1993, 1994, and 1995. Business systems products offer an enterprise-wide distributedclient/server environment based on the Microsoft Windows NT operating system andthe server applications in the Microsoft BackOffice family of products. Revenuesfrom these products increased strongly in 1994 and 1995. 14 17 Revenues from developer products increased steadily in all three years, asmore independent software vendors, corporate developers, and solutionsdevelopers licensed tools to develop software for Windows and Windows NT. Applications and content product group revenues were $2.24 billion, $2.82billion, and $3.58 billion in 1993, 1994, and 1995. Increases in desktop applications revenues were led by strong sales ofMicrosoft Office. The Microsoft Office Standard product includes the MicrosoftExcel spreadsheet, the Microsoft Word word processor, the Microsoft PowerPointpresentation graphics program, and a Microsoft Mail client-access license, whilethe Microsoft Office Professional version also includes the Microsoft Accessdatabase management system. Sales of stand-alone versions of Microsoft Excel andMicrosoft Word decreased in 1994 and 1995 as the sales mix continued to shift tointegrated product suites. Microsoft Home, a broad range of consumer products, also showed continuedgrowth. The Microsoft Home brand includes CD-ROM multimedia reference titles andsoftware products for home and small office productivity, children's creativity,and entertainment. Microsoft also markets the Microsoft Mouse and MicrosoftNatural Keyboard. Mouse sales were flat during the three-year period, while theinitial introduction of the keyboard increased revenues in 1995. Sales channels. Microsoft distributes its products primarily through OEMlicenses, corporate licenses, and retail packaged products. OEM channel revenuesare license fees from original equipment manufacturers. Microsoft has threemajor geographic sales and marketing organizations: U.S. and Canada, Europe, andelsewhere in the world (Other International). Sales of corporate licenses andpackaged products in these channels are primarily to distributors and resellers. OEM channel revenues were $731 million in 1993, $1.18 billion in 1994, and$1.65 billion in 1995. The primary source of OEM revenues is the licensing ofoperating systems, particularly MS-DOS and Microsoft Windows. As such, OEMchannel revenues are highly dependent on PC shipment volume. U.S. and Canada channel revenues were $1.37 billion, $1.58 billion, and$1.88 billion in 1993, 1994, and 1995. Revenues in Europe were $1.26 billion, $1.36 billion, and $1.49 billion in1993, 1994, and 1995. Growth rates have been lower in Europe than in othergeographic areas due to general economic slowness, higher existing marketshares, and a more dramatic shift to corporate licensing programs. Other International channel revenues were $392 million in 1993, $532million in 1994, and $924 million in 1995. Growth rates continue to be strongdue to customer acceptance of newly localized products, particularly in Japan,and early entrance into emerging markets. Microsoft's operating results are affected by foreign exchange rates.Approximately 44%, 40%, and 37% of Microsoft's revenues were collected inforeign currencies during 1993, 1994, and 1995. Since much of Microsoft'sinternational manufacturing costs and operating expenses are also incurred inlocal currencies, the impact of exchange rates on net income is less than onrevenues. OPERATING EXPENSES Cost of revenues. As a percentage of revenues, cost of revenues was 16.9%in 1993, 16.4% in 1994, and 14.8% in 1995. The percentage decreased due to agreater proportion of licenses to OEMs and corporations, lower disk prices fromvendors, and a higher proportion of CD-ROM versions. These factors were offsetsomewhat by increased sales of lower-margin products such as integrated suitesand upgrades. Research and development. Microsoft made substantial investments in R&D in1994, and the rate of growth accelerated in 1995. Expense increases resultedprimarily from development staff headcount growth and higher levels ofthird-party development costs in many areas, including development efforts forWindows 95 and The Microsoft Network. R&D costs also increased for businesssystems, consumer systems, desktop applications, and consumer products. 15 18 Sales and marketing. The increase in the absolute dollar amount of salesand marketing expense in 1995 was due primarily to increased product-specificmarketing programs, a Microsoft brand advertising campaign, and continuedexpansion of Product Support Services. In 1994, sales and marketing expensesincreased at a slower rate than revenues due to a concerted performanceorientation at all sales sites. General and administrative. Increases in general and administrativeexpenses in 1994 and 1995 were primarily attributable to higher legal costs andgrowth in the computer systems and the number of people necessary to supportoverall increases in the scope of Microsoft's operations. NONOPERATING ITEMS Interest income, which was $83 million, $104 million, and $193 million in1993, 1994, and 1995, increased primarily as a result of a larger investmentportfolio generated by cash from operations. In the fourth quarter of 1995, Microsoft paid a $46 million breakup fee toIntuit Inc. in connection with the termination of a planned merger. In the third quarter of 1994, Microsoft recorded a $120 million charge toreflect the estimated impact of a jury verdict in the Stac Electronics patentlitigation and related expenses. In June 1994, Microsoft reached an agreementwith Stac to settle the litigation and adjusted its estimate accordingly,resulting in a credit of $30 million in the fourth quarter and a net pretaxcharge of $90 million for 1994. PROVISION FOR INCOME TAXES The effective tax rate increased from 32.0% in 1993 to 33.5% in 1994 and33.0% in 1995 primarily because of an increase in the U.S. statutory income taxrate. NET INCOME Net income as a percent of revenues decreased in 1995 due to increasedrelative research and development, sales and marketing, and general andadministrative expenses, offset by the lower relative cost of revenues and thehigher relative net nonoperating income. The net income percentage decreased in1994, primarily due to the patent litigation charge and increased research anddevelopment expenses, offset by the lower relative level of sales and marketingexpenses.FINANCIAL CONDITION Microsoft's cash and short-term investments totaled $4.75 billion at June30, 1995. The portfolio is diversified among security types, industries, andindividual issuers. Microsoft's investments are investment grade and liquid. Theportfolio is invested predominantly in U.S. dollar denominated securities, butalso includes foreign currency positions in anticipation of continuedinternational expansion. Microsoft's portfolio is invested in short-termsecurities to minimize interest rate risk and facilitate rapid deployment in theevent of immediate cash needs. Microsoft has no material long-term debt.Microsoft has $70 million of standby multicurrency lines of credit that supportforeign currency hedging and international cash management. Stockholders' equity at June 30, 1995 exceeded $5.3 billion. Cash generated from operations has been sufficient historically to fundMicrosoft's investment in research and development activities and facilitiesexpansion. As Microsoft grows, investments will continue in research anddevelopment in existing and advanced areas of technology. Microsoft's cash willalso be used to acquire technology and to fund ventures and other strategicopportunities. Additions to property, plant, and equipment are expected tocontinue, including facilities and computer systems for research anddevelopment, sales and marketing, product support, and administrative staff. Forexample, on June 30, 1995, commitments related to the construction of newbuildings approximated $150 million. The exercise of stock options by employees provides additional cash. Theseproceeds have been used in Microsoft's open market stock repurchase programthrough which Microsoft provides shares for stock option and stock purchaseplans. This program will continue in 1996. 16 19 During 1995, to enhance its stock repurchase program, Microsoft sold equityput warrants to independent third parties. These put warrants entitle theholders to sell shares of Microsoft common stock to Microsoft on certain datesat specified prices. Also during 1995, a subsidiary of Tele-Communications, Inc. (TCI) purchaseda 20% minority interest in the newly formed Microsoft Online ServicesPartnership. TCI contributed $125 million of TCI common stock, and Microsoftcontributed the business assets of its online service, The Microsoft Network,which was in development. Management believes existing cash and short-term investments together withfunds generated from operations will be sufficient to meet operatingrequirements in 1996. Microsoft's cash and short-term investments are alsomanaged to be available for strategic investment opportunities or otherpotential large-scale cash needs that may arise in pursuit of Microsoft'slong-term strategies. Microsoft shareholders have also authorized the issuance of up to 100million shares of preferred stock, which may be used for any proper corporatepurpose. Microsoft has not paid cash dividends on its common stock.OUTLOOK AND UNCERTAINTIES Microsoft does not provide forecasts of potential future financialperformance. While management of Microsoft is optimistic about Microsoft'slong-term prospects, the following issues and uncertainties, among others,should be considered in evaluating its growth outlook. Rapid technological change. The personal computer software industry ischaracterized by rapid technological change and uncertainty as to the impact ofemerging areas such as the Internet and online services, the informationhighway, networked collaboration products, and electronic commerce. Long-term investment cycle. Developing and localizing software is expensiveand the investment in product development often involves a long payback cycle.Microsoft's plans for 1996 include significant investments in software researchand development and related product opportunities from which significantrevenues are not anticipated for a number of years. Management expects totalspending for research and development in 1996 to increase over spending in 1995. Customer acceptance. While Microsoft performs extensive usability and betatesting of new products, user acceptance and corporate penetration ratesultimately dictate the success of development and marketing efforts of productssuch as Windows 95, Microsoft Office for Windows 95, or the Microsoft BackOfficefamily of products. Product ship schedules. Delays in the release of new products can causeoperational inefficiencies that impact manufacturing and distribution logistics,independent software vendor (ISV) and OEM relationships, and telephone supportstaffing. Prices. Future prices Microsoft is able to obtain for its products maydecrease from historical levels depending on competitive market or cost factors.Prices of software in Europe are generally higher than in the U.S. to coverlocalization costs and higher costs of distribution. Such price uplifts coulderode in the future. Integrated suites. The price of integrated suites such as Microsoft Office,is less than the sum of the prices for the individual programs included in thisproduct when such programs are licensed separately. Revenues from MicrosoftOffice may continue to increase as a percentage of total revenues. Saturation. Product upgrades, enabling users to upgrade from earlierversions of Microsoft's products or from competitors' products, have lowerprices and margins than new products. As the desktop applications market becomessaturated, the sales mix shifts from standard products to upgrade products. Thistrend is expected to continue. 17 20 Channel mix. Average revenue per license is lower from OEM licenses thanfrom retail versions, reflecting the relatively lower direct costs of operationsin the OEM channel. An increasingly higher percentage of revenues was achievedthrough the OEM channel during 1994 and 1995. Corporate licenses. Average revenue per unit from corporate licenseprograms is lower than average revenue per unit from retail versions shippedthrough the finished goods channels. Unit sales under corporate licensingprograms may continue to increase. Cost of revenues. Although cost of revenues as a percentage of net revenuesdecreased in 1994 and 1995, it varies with channel mix and product mix withinchannels. Changes in channel and product mix, including the potential retailupgrade cycle of Windows 95, may increase cost of revenues as a percentage ofnet revenues in 1996. Sales and marketing and support investments. Microsoft's plans for 1996include continued investments in its sales and marketing and support groups.Microsoft brand advertising is also expected to increase. Foreign exchange. A large percentage of Microsoft's sales and costs ofmanufacturing and marketing are transacted in local currencies. As a result,Microsoft's international results of operations are subject to foreign exchangerate fluctuations. Intellectual property rights. Microsoft diligently defends its intellectualproperty rights, but unlicensed copying of software represents a loss ofrevenues to Microsoft. While this adversely affects U.S. revenues, revenue lossis even more significant outside of the U.S., particularly in certain countrieswhere laws are less protective of intellectual property rights. Throughout theworld, Microsoft actively educates consumers on the benefits of licensinggenuine products and educates lawmakers on the advantages of a business climatewhere intellectual property rights are protected. There can be no assurance thatcontinued efforts will affect revenues positively. Future growth rates. If a substantial number of users upgrade to Windows95, revenue growth rates in the initial shipping quarters of 1996 could be atrelatively high levels. Revenue growth rates in the comparable quarters of 1997may not approach such levels. As discussed above, operating expenses areexpected to increase in 1996. Because of the fixed nature of a significantportion of such expenses, coupled with the possibility of slower revenue growth,operating margins in 1997 may decrease from those in 1996. Litigation. Litigation regarding intellectual property rights, patents, andcopyrights is increasing in the PC software industry. In addition, there aregovernment regulation and investigation risks along with other general corporatelegal risks.ITEM 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTSITEM 9. CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES None. 18 21 INCOME STATEMENTS (IN MILLIONS, EXCEPT EARNINGS PER SHARE) See accompanying notes. 19 22 CASH FLOWS STATEMENTS (IN MILLIONS) See accompanying notes. 20 23 BALANCE SHEETS (IN MILLIONS) See accompanying notes. 21 24 STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY STATEMENTS (IN MILLIONS) See accompanying notes. 22 25 NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (IN MILLIONS)SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES Principles of consolidation. The financial statements include the accountsof Microsoft and its subsidiaries. Significant intercompany transactions andbalances have been eliminated. Foreign currencies. Assets and liabilities recorded in foreign currencieson the books of foreign subsidiaries are translated at the exchange rate on thebalance sheet date. Translation adjustments resulting from this process arecharged or credited to equity. Revenues, costs, and expenses are translated ataverage rates of exchange prevailing during the year. Gains and losses onforeign currency transactions are included in other expenses. Revenue recognition. Revenue from sales to distributors and resellers isrecognized when related products are shipped. Revenue from corporate licenseprograms generally is recognized when the product is installed by the user.Finished goods revenue attributable to significant support (telephone supportand specified and unspecified enhancements) is recognized when such obligationsare fulfilled. Costs related to insignificant obligations, which includestelephone support for certain products, are accrued. Revenue from products licensed to original equipment manufacturers isrecognized when the licensed products are shipped by the OEM. Revenue from software maintenance, service, and support contracts isrecognized ratably over the contract period. Provisions are recorded for returns and bad debts. Research and development. Research and development costs are expensed asincurred. The current accounting rule, Accounting for the Costs of ComputerSoftware to Be Sold, Leased, or Otherwise Marketed, does not materially affectthe Company. Telephone support. Telephone support costs are included in sales andmarketing. Income taxes. Income tax expense includes U.S. and international incometaxes, plus an accrual for U.S. taxes on undistributed earnings of internationalsubsidiaries. Certain items of income and expense are not reported in taxreturns and financial statements in the same year. The tax effect of thisdifference is reported as deferred income taxes. Tax credits are accounted foras a reduction of tax expense in the year in which the credits reduce taxespayable. Earnings per share. Earnings per share is computed on the basis of theweighted average number of common shares outstanding plus the effect ofoutstanding stock options, computed using the treasury stock method. Financial instruments. The Company considers all liquid investments with amaturity of three months or less at the date of purchase to be cash equivalents.Short-term investments generally mature between three months and three yearsfrom the purchase date. All cash and short-term investments are classified asavailable for sale. Cost approximates market value for all classifications ofcash and short-term investments; realized and unrealized gains and losses arenot material. Statement of Financial Accounting Standard Accounting for CertainInvestments in Debt and Equity Securities was adopted in 1995 and did not have amaterial impact on the financial statements. Inventories. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. Cost isdetermined using the first-in, first-out method. Property, plant, and equipment. Property, plant, and equipment is stated atcost and depreciated using the straight-line method. Estimated lives are asfollows: buildings, 30 years; leasehold improvements, the lease term; computerequipment and other, principally three years. 23 26 NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED) (IN MILLIONS) Diversification of risk. The Company's investment portfolio is diversifiedand consists of short-term investment grade securities. At June 30, 1994 and1995, approximately 40% of accounts receivable represented amounts due from tenchannel purchasers. Two of these each accounted for approximately 10%, 13%, and12% of revenues in 1993, 1994, and 1995. Finished goods sales to international customers in Europe, Japan,Australia, and Canada are primarily billed in local currencies. Payment cyclesare relatively short, generally less than 90 days. European manufacturing costsand international selling, distribution, and support costs are generallydisbursed in local currencies. Local currency cash balances in excess ofshort-term operating needs are generally converted into U.S. dollar cash andshort-term investments upon receipt. Therefore, foreign exchange ratefluctuations generally do not create a risk of material transaction gains orlosses. As a result, Microsoft's hedging activities for transaction exposureshave been minimal. No material hedge contracts were outstanding at June 30,1995. Translated results of operations of the Company's foreign subsidiaries areaffected by foreign exchange rates. During 1995 and for 1996, the Company hedgeda percentage of planned translated international finished goods revenues bypurchasing options on the applicable currencies. Premiums paid for the options,which were not material, are being amortized over the lives of the options. Anygains will be recognized when and if realized. Reclassifications. Certain reclassifications have been made for consistentpresentation.CASH AND SHORT-TERM INVESTMENTSPROPERTY, PLANT, AND EQUIPMENT 24 27 NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED) (IN MILLIONS)INCOME TAXES The provision for income taxes was composed of: Differences between the U.S. statutory and effective tax rates were: Deferred income tax balances were: U.S. and international components of income before income taxes were: The Internal Revenue Service is examining the Company's U.S. income taxreturns for 1990 and 1991. The Company believes any adjustments from theexamination will not be material to the financial statements. Income taxes paidwere $187 million, $247 million, and $430 million in 1993, 1994, and 1995. 25 28 NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED) (IN MILLIONS)COMMON STOCK Shares of common stock outstanding were as follows: The Company repurchases its common stock in the open market to provideshares for issuance to employees under stock option and stock purchase plans.The Company's Board of Directors authorized continuation of this program in1996.PUT WARRANTS In connection with the Company's stock repurchase program, put warrantswere sold to independent third parties during 1995. The put warrants entitle theholders to sell shares of Microsoft common stock to the Company at specifiedprices. On June 30, 1995, 8.0 million warrants were outstanding with a strikeprice of $69.75 per share. The warrants expire at various dates between February1996 and November 1996, are exercisable only at maturity, and are settleable incash at Microsoft's option. The maximum potential repurchase obligation of $405million has been reclassified from stockholders' equity to put warrants as ofJune 30, 1995. There was no impact on earnings per share in 1995.EMPLOYEE STOCK AND SAVINGS PLANS Employee stock purchase plan. The Company has an employee stock purchaseplan for all eligible employees. Under the plan, shares of the Company's commonstock may be purchased at six-month intervals at 85% of the lower of the fairmarket value on the first or the last day of each six-month period. Employeesmay purchase shares having a value not exceeding 10% of their gross compensationduring an offering period. During 1993, 1994, and 1995, employees purchased 1.0million, 1.1 million, and 1.0 million shares at average prices of $33.29,$34.16, and $46.76 per share. At June 30, 1995, 2.1 million shares were reservedfor future issuance. Savings plan. The Company has a savings plan, which qualifies under Section401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code. Under the plan, participating U.S.employees may defer up to 15% of their pretax salary, but not more thanstatutory limits. The Company contributes fifty cents for each dollarcontributed by a participant, with a maximum contribution of 3% of aparticipant's earnings. The Company's matching contributions to the savings planwere $7 million, $9 million, and $12 million in 1993, 1994, and 1995. Stock option plans. The Company has stock option plans for directors,officers, and all employees, which provide for nonqualified and incentive stockoptions. The Board of Directors determines the option price (not to be less thanfair market value for incentive options) at the date of grant. Options grantedprior to 1995 generally vest over four and one-half years and expire ten yearsfrom the date of grant. Options granted during and after 1995 generally vestover four and one-half years and expire seven years from the date of grant,while certain options vest over seven and one-half years and expire after tenyears. At June 30, 1995, options for 58.5 million shares were vested and 92.8million shares were available for future grants under the plans. 26 29 NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED) (IN MILLIONS) Stock options outstanding were as follows:LEASES The Company has operating leases for most U.S. and international sales andsupport offices and certain equipment. Rental expense for operating leases was$54 million, $68 million, and $86 million in 1993, 1994, and 1995. Futureminimum rental commitments under noncancelable leases, in millions of dollars,are: 1996, $78; 1997, $65; 1998, $56; 1999, $44; 2000, $28; and thereafter, $13.THE MICROSOFT NETWORK During 1995, a wholly owned subsidiary of Tele-Communications, Inc. (TCI)purchased a 20% minority interest in the newly formed Microsoft Online ServicesPartnership. TCI contributed $125 million of TCI common stock and Microsoftcontributed the business assets of its online service, The Microsoft Network,which was in development. Microsoft owns 80% of the entity, whose operationshave not been material to the financial results of Microsoft. The entity wassubsequently reorganized into The Microsoft Network, LLC.NONCONTINUING ITEMS In the fourth quarter of 1995, the Company paid a $46 million breakup feeto Intuit Inc. in connection with the termination of a planned merger. In the third quarter of 1994, the Company recorded a $120 million charge toreflect the estimated impact of a jury verdict in the Stac Electronics patentlitigation and related expenses. In June 1994, the Company reached an agreementwith Stac to settle the litigation and adjusted its estimate accordingly,resulting in a credit of $30 million in the fourth quarter and a net pretaxcharge of $90 million for 1994.CONTINGENCIES On July 15, 1994, Microsoft and the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ)entered into a consent decree resolving the DOJ's non-public investigation ofMicrosoft. In the consent decree, which involves no admission of wrongdoing onMicrosoft's part, Microsoft agreed to make certain changes in its OEM licensingpractices. Microsoft also agreed to employ a uniform duration in itsnondisclosure agreement for precommercial versions 27 30 NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED) (IN MILLIONS)of certain operating system products, and clarified the rights andresponsibilities of those signing such nondisclosure agreements. The consentdecree was approved by the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia onAugust 21, 1995. The Antitrust Division of the DOJ has stated that it is conducting aninvestigation concerning Microsoft's inclusion of client-access software for TheMicrosoft Network in Windows 95. Although there is no assurance that this matterwill be resolved favorably and that Microsoft's future financial statements willnot be adversely affected, Microsoft currently believes that resolution of thismatter will not have a material adverse effect on its financial condition orresults of operations.INFORMATION BY GEOGRAPHIC AREA Intercompany sales between geographic areas are accounted for at pricesrepresentative of unaffiliated party transactions. "U.S. operations" includeshipments to customers in the U.S., licensing to OEMs, and exports of finishedgoods directly to international customers, primarily in Canada, South America,and Asia. Exports and international OEM transactions are primarily in U.S.dollars and totaled $426 million, $787 million, and $1,263 million in 1993,1994, and 1995. "Other international operations" primarily include subsidiariesin Australia, Japan, Korea, and Taiwan. International revenues, which includeEuropean operations, other international operations, exports, and OEMdistribution, were 55.3%, 54.0%, and 55.3% of total revenues in 1993, 1994, and1995. 28 31 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS' REPORTTo the Board of Directors and Stockholders of Microsoft Corporation: We have audited the accompanying balance sheets of Microsoft Corporationand subsidiaries as of June 30, 1994 and 1995, the related statements of income,cash flows, and stockholders' equity for each of the three years ended June 30,1995. Our audits also included the financial statement schedule listed in theIndex at Item 8. These financial statements and schedule are the responsibilityof the Company's management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion onthese financial statements and schedule based on our audits. We conducted our audits in accordance with generally accepted auditingstandards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtainreasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of materialmisstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supportingthe amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. An audit also includesassessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made bymanagement, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion. In our opinion, such financial statements present fairly, in all materialrespects, the financial position of Microsoft Corporation and subsidiaries as ofJune 30, 1994 and 1995, and the results of their operations and their cash flowsfor each of the three years ended June 30, 1995 in conformity with generallyaccepted accounting principles. Also, in our opinion the financial statementschedule, when considered in relation to the basic financial statements taken asa whole, presents fairly in all material respects the information set forththerein./s/ DELOITTE & TOUCHE LLPSeattle, WashingtonJuly 17, 1995(August 21, 1995 as toContingencies Note) 29 32 PART IIIITEM 10. DIRECTORS AND EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF THE REGISTRANT Information with respect to Directors may be found under the caption"Election of Directors and Management Information" on pages 1 and 2 of theCompany's Proxy Statement dated September 25, 1995, for the Annual Meeting ofShareholders to be held October 27, 1995 (the "Proxy Statement"). Suchinformation is incorporated herein by reference. Information with respect toExecutive Officers may be found on pages 11 and 12 hereof, under the caption"Executive Officers of the Registrant."ITEM 11. EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION The information in the Proxy Statement set forth under the captions"Information Regarding Executive Officer Compensation" on pages 4 through 8 and"Information Regarding the Board and its Committees" on page 2 is incorporatedherein by reference.ITEM 12. SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT The information set forth under the caption "Information RegardingBeneficial Ownership of Principal Shareholders, Directors, and Management" onpage 3 of the Proxy Statement is incorporated herein by reference.ITEM 13. CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS The information set forth under the caption "Certain Transactions" on page8 of the Proxy Statement is incorporated herein by reference. 30 33 PART IVITEM 14. EXHIBITS, FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES AND REPORTS ON FORM 8-K (a) Financial Statements and Schedules The financial statements of Microsoft as set forth under Item 8 are filed as part of this report. Supplemental Schedule II -- Valuation and Qualifying Accounts is filed on page 32 of this report. Financial statement schedules other than those listed above have been omitted since they are either not required, not applicable, or the information is otherwise included. The independent auditors' report with respect to the above-listed financial statements and schedule appears on page 29 of this report. (b) Reports on Form 8-K No reports on Form 8-K were filed during the last quarter of fiscal 1995. (c) Exhibit Listing- ---------------(1) Incorporated by reference to Annual Report on Form 10-K For The Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 1994.(2) Incorporated by reference to Registration Statement 33-37623 on Form S-8.(3) Incorporated by reference to Annual Report on Form 10-K For The Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 1993. 31 34 SCHEDULE II -- VALUATION AND QUALIFYING ACCOUNTS ALLOWANCE FOR DOUBTFUL ACCOUNTS (IN MILLIONS) 32 35 SIGNATURES Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the SecuritiesExchange Act of 1934, the Registrant has duly caused this report to be signed onits behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City ofRedmond, State of Washington, on September 13, 1995. MICROSOFT CORPORATION By /s/ MICHAEL W. BROWN ------------------------------------ Michael W. Brown, Vice President, Finance; Chief Financial Officer Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, thisreport has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of Registrantand in the capacities indicated on September 13, 1995. 33
