 Table of Contents UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Washington, D.C. 20549 FORM 10-Q/A Amendment No. 1 For the Quarterly Period Ended December 31, 2005 OR For the Transition Period From to CommissionFile Number: 0-14278 MICROSOFT CORPORATION (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) (425) 882-8080 (Registrant s telephone number, including area code) None (Former name, former address and former fiscal year, if changed since last report) Indicate by check mark whether theregistrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and(2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes No Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, or a non-accelerated filer.See definition of accelerated filer and large accelerated filer in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. Large acceleratedfiler Accelerated filer Non-accelerated filer Indicate by check mark whether theregistrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). Yes No Indicate the number of shares outstanding of each of the issuer s classes of common stock, as of thelatest practicable date. Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION FORM 10-Q/A Amendment No. 1 EXPLANATORY NOTE This amendment on Form 10-Q/A is being filed to revise PartII Other Information of the Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended December 31, 2005 that was filed on January 26, 2006 ( the Report ) to correct the inadvertent omission of Item 4 Submission ofMatters to a Vote of Security Holders. This amendment to the Report does not alter any part of the content of the Report, except for the changes and additional information provided herein. This amendment continues to speak as of the date of theReport. We have not updated the disclosures contained in this amendment to reflect any events that occurred at a date subsequent to the filing of the Report. The filing of this amendment is not a representation that any statements contained in theReport or this amendment are true or complete as of any date subsequent to the date of the Report. This amendment does not affect the information originally set forth in the Report, the remaining portions of which have not been amended. Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION FORM 10-Q/A Amendment No. 1 For the Quarter Ended December 31, 2005 INDEX Table of Contents Part II. Other Information The Annual Meeting of Shareholders was held onNovember 9, 2005. The following proposals were adopted by the margins indicated: 1. To elect a Board of Directors to hold office until the next annual meeting of shareholders and until their successors are elected and qualified. 2. To ratify selection of Deloitte Touche LLP as the Company s independent auditor for fiscal year2006. 1 Table of Contents 2 Table of Contents SIGNATURE Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly causedthis report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned thereunto duly authorized. 3