 Table of Contents UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Washington, D.C. 20549 FORM 10-Q For the Quarterly Period Ended March 31, 2006 OR For the Transition Period From to Commission File Number: 0-14278 MICROSOFT CORPORATION (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) (425) 882-8080 (Registrant s telephone number, including area code) None (Former name, former address and former fiscal year, if changed since last report) Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities ExchangeAct of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past90 days. Yes No Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer,an accelerated filer, or a non-accelerated filer. See definition of accelerated filer and large accelerated filer in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. Large accelerated filer Accelerated filer Non-accelerated filer Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). Yes No Indicate the number of shares outstanding of each of the issuer s classes of common stock, as of the latest practicable date. Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION FORM 10-Q For the Quarter Ended March 31, 2006 INDEX Table of Contents Part I. Financial Information °Item 1. Financial Statements MICROSOFT CORPORATION INCOMESTATEMENTS (In millions, except per share amounts)(Unaudited) See accompanying notes. 1 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION BALANCESHEETS (In millions) See accompanying notes. 2 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION CASHFLOWS STATEMENTS (In millions)(Unaudited) See accompanying notes. 3 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION STOCKHOLDERS EQUITY STATEMENTS (In millions)(Unaudited) See accompanying notes. 4 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION NOTES TOFINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Unaudited) Note 1 Basis of Presentation and Consolidation Basis of Presentation In the opinion of management, the accompanying balance sheets and related interim statements of income, cash flows, and stockholders equity includeall adjustments, consisting only of normal recurring items, necessary for their fair presentation in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ( U.S. GAAP ). Preparing financial statementsrequires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. Examples include estimates of loss contingencies, product life cycles, and stock-based compensation forfeiturerates; and assumptions such as the elements comprising a software arrangement, including the distinction between upgrades/enhancements and new products; when technological feasibility is achieved for our products; the potential outcome of future taxconsequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns; and determining when investment impairments are other-than-temporary. Actual results and outcomes may differ from management s estimates andassumptions. Interim results are not necessarily indicative ofresults for a full year. The information included in this Form 10-Q should be read in conjunction with Management s Discussion and Analysis and the financial statements and notes thereto included in the Microsoft Corporation 2005 Form10-K. During fiscal year 2006, we revised our expenseclassification policies, which resulted in reclassifications of certain operating expenses. We have reclassified the prior period amounts to conform to the current period presentation. There was no impact on operating income. Basis of Consolidation The financial statements include the accounts of Microsoft Corporation andits subsidiaries. Intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated. Equity investments in which we exercise significant influence but do not exercise control and are not the primary beneficiary are accounted for using the equity method.Investments in which we are not able to exercise significant influence over the investee are accounted for under the cost method. Note 2 Inventories, net Components of inventories are as follows: Note 3 Earnings Per Share Basic earnings per share is computed on the basis of theweighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. Diluted earnings per share is computed on the basis of the weighted average number of shares of common stock plus the effect of dilutive potential common sharesoutstanding during the 5 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) (Unaudited) period using the treasury stock method. Dilutive potential common shares include outstanding stock options, stock awards, and shared performance stockawards. Components of basic and diluted earnings per share areas follows: The following sharesattributable to outstanding stock options were excluded from the calculation of diluted earnings per share because their inclusion would have been anti-dilutive. In addition, the following shared performance stock awards have been excluded from thecalculation of diluted earnings per share because the number of shares ultimately issued is contingent on our performance against metrics established for the performance period. Note 4 Unearned Revenue Components of unearned revenue are as follows: 6 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) (Unaudited) Unearned revenue by segment is as follows: Note 5 Stockholders Equity On October 26, 2005, our Board of Directorsapproved a modification to the July 20, 2004 share repurchase plan. The original repurchase plan called for up to $30 billion of Microsoft common stock to be repurchased over the succeeding four years. Under the revised plan, we expect tocomplete the $30 billion approved repurchase amount no later than December 2006. As of March 31, 2006, approximately $6.4 billion remained of the $30 billion approved repurchase amount. All repurchases will be made using cashresources. The repurchase program may be suspended or discontinued at any time without notice. In any period, cash used in financing activities related to common stock repurchased may differ from the comparable change in stockholders equity,reflecting timing differences between the recognition of share repurchase transactions and their settlement for cash. We repurchased the following shares of common stock under the above-described repurchase plan: During the nine monthsMarch 31, 2006, our Board of Directors declared the following dividends: On July 20, 2004, our Board of Directors declared a regular quarterly dividend of $0.08 per share and a one-timespecial dividend of $3.00 per share. On September 15, 2004, December 8, 2004, and March 23, 2005, the Board declared regular quarterly dividends of $0.08 per share. Note 6 Stock-Based Compensation Effective July 1, 2005, we adopted Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ) No. 123(R), Share-Based Payment, usingthe modified prospective application transition method. Because the fair value 7 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) (Unaudited) recognition provisions of SFAS No. 123, Stock-Based Compensation, and SFAS No. 123(R) were materially consistent under our equity plans, theadoption of SFAS No. 123(R) did not have a significant impact on our financial position or our results of operations. Prior to our adoption of SFAS No. 123(R), benefits of tax deductions in excess of recognized compensation costs werereported as operating cash flows. SFAS No. 123(R) requires excess tax benefits be reported as a financing cash inflow rather than as a reduction of taxes paid. Our net income for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006 includes $374 million and $1.4 billion, respectively,of compensation costs and $131 million and $473 million, respectively, of income tax benefits related to our stock-based compensation arrangements. Our net income for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2005 includes $617 million and $1.9billion, respectively, of compensation costs and $216 million and $670 million, respectively, of income tax benefits related to our stock-based compensation arrangements. Stock Awards and Shared Performance Stock Awards. Stock awards ( SAs ) are grants that entitle theholder to shares of common stock as the award vests. SharedPerformance Stock Awards ( SPSAs ) are a form of SAs in which the number of shares ultimately received depends on our performance against specified performance targets. The performance period is July 1, 2003 through June 30, 2006(January 1, 2004 through June 30, 2006 for certain executive officers). At the end of the performance period, the number of shares of stock and SAs issued will be determined by adjusting upward or downward from the target in a range between 33%and 150% (0% to 150% for certain executive officers). The final performance percentage on which the payout will be based, considering performance metrics established for the performance period, will be determined by our Board of Directors or aCommittee of the Board at its sole discretion. Shares of stock will be issued following the end of the performance period and as the SAs vest ratably over the following two years. Because these awards cover a three-year period, SPSAs generally willonly be awarded in fiscal year 2006 to newly hired and promoted employees eligible to receive SPSAs. We measure the fair value of SAs and SPSAs based upon the market price of the underlying common stock as of the date of grant, reduced by the presentvalue of estimated future dividends, using an expected quarterly dividend rate of $0.08 ($0.09 beginning December 2005) and risk-free interest rates ranging from 4.2% to 4.8%. SAs and SPSAs are amortized over their applicable vesting period(generally five years) using the straight-line method. 8 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) (Unaudited) The following activity has occurred under our existing plans: As of March 31,2006, there was $1.7 billion and $417 million of total unrecognized compensation costs related to SAs and SPSAs, respectively. These costs are expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of 3.6 years and 2.4 years, respectively. 9 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) (Unaudited) During the three and nine months ended March 31, 2005, the following activity occurred under ourplans: StockOptions. Nonqualified stock options have been granted to our directors under our non-employee director stock plan. Nonqualified and incentive stock options have been granted to our officers and employees under our employee stock plans.Options granted between 1995 and 2001 generally vest over four and one-half years and expire seven years from the date of grant, while certain options vest either over four and one-half years or over seven and one-half years and expire ten yearsfrom the date of grant. Options granted after 2001 vest over four and one-half years and expire ten years from the date of grant. No stock options were granted during the three months ended March 31, 2006 and approximately 1.3 millionstock options were granted in conjunction with business acquisitions during the nine months ended March 31, 2006. No stock options were granted during the three or nine months ended March 31, 2005. A summary of option activity under the plans for the three and nine monthsended March 31, 2006 is as follows: As of March 31,2006, 240 million options transferred to JPMorgan remained outstanding and are excluded from the amount noted as options outstanding in the table above. These options have strike prices ranging from 10 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) (Unaudited) $28.73 to $89.58 per share and have expiration dates extending through December 2006. Included in the options outstanding balance are approximately fourmillion options that were granted in conjunction with business acquisitions. While these options are included in the options outstanding balance, they are excluded from the weighted average exercise prices presented. These options have an exerciseprice range of $0 to $170.87 and a weighted average exercise price of $12.27. As of March 31, 2006, there was $559 million of total unrecognized compensation costs related to stock options. These costs are expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of one year. During the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006 and 2005, thefollowing activity occurred under our plans: Cash received fromstock option exercises for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006 was $351 million and $1.61 billion, respectively. The income tax benefits from stock option exercises totaled $46 million and $154 million for the three and nine monthsended March 31, 2006. At March 31, 2006, anaggregate of 811 million shares were authorized for future grant under our stock plans, which cover stock options, SAs, and SPSAs. Awards that expire or are canceled without delivery of shares generally become available for issuance under theplans. The options transferred to JPMorgan have been removed from our plans; any options transferred to JPMorgan that expire without being exercised will not become available for grant under any of our plans. We issue new shares to satisfy stock option exercises. Under our revisedshare repurchase plan approved by our Board of Directors on October 26, 2005, we anticipate that shares repurchased will reduce the dilutive impact of our share-based arrangements. We currently expect the planned repurchase amount of$30 billion to be completed no later than December 2006; however, as this repurchase program may be suspended or discontinued at any time without notice, the timing and amount of repurchases is not known. Employee Stock Purchase Plan. We have an employee stock purchaseplan for all eligible employees. Under this plan, shares of our common stock currently may be purchased by employees at three-month intervals at 90% of the fair market value on the last day of each three-month period. Employees may purchase shareshaving a value not exceeding 15% of their gross compensation during an offering period. During the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006, we issued 3.7 million and 12.8 million shares, respectively, under our employee stockpurchase plan at an average price of $24.35 per share and $23.55 per share, respectively. At March 31, 2006, 146.9 million shares were reserved for future issuance under this plan. 11 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) (Unaudited) Note 7 Investment Income and Other Components of investment income and other are as follows: Note 8 Contingencies Government competition law matters. OnMarch 25, 2004, the European Commission issued a decision in its competition law investigation of us. The Commission concluded that we infringed European competition law by refusing to provide our competitors with licenses to certain protocoltechnology in the Windows server operating systems and by including streaming media playback functionality in Windows desktop operating systems. The Commission ordered us to make the relevant licenses to our technology available to our competitorsand to develop and make available a version of the Windows desktop operating system that does not include specified software relating to media playback. The decision also imposed a fine of 497 million, which resulted in a charge in the thirdquarter of fiscal year 2004 of 497 million ($605 million). We filed an appeal of the decision to the Court of First Instance on June 6, 2004. On December 22, 2004, the Court ordered that we must comply with the decision pendingreview on appeal and we are taking steps to ensure we are in compliance. The hearing on the appeal began on April 24, 2006. We continue to contest the conclusion that European competition law was infringed and will defend our position vigorously. InDecember 2005, the Commission issued a Statement of Objections that preliminarily concluded we were not in full compliance with the 2004 decree. The Statement of Objections could result in further monetary fines of up to 2 million per dayfrom December 15, 2005 and other obligations. We disputed that finding, and the Commission conducted an oral hearing on the Statement of Objections and our response on March 30-31, 2006. The Commission may, but is not required to, issue adecision based on the Statement of Objections at any time thereafter. On December 7, 2005, the Korean Fair Trade Commission ( KFTC ) announced a ruling in its investigation of us, holding that we abused a market dominant position and engaged in unfair trade practices under the Korean Fair TradeLaw by incorporating instant messaging and media player functionality into the Windows client operating system, and streaming media technologies into the Windows server operating system. The KFTC also announced the imposition of remedies, includinga fine of approximately $34 million. The KFTC issued its formal written ruling and corrective order on February 23, 2006. The KFTC held that our integration of Windows Media Player and Windows Messenger in Windows client and its integration ofWindows Media Services in Windows server constituted an abuse of monopoly power and unlawful tying in violation of the Korean Fair Trade Act. Under the order, which will go into effect within 180 days, we may no longer distribute Windows in Korea ascurrently designed. We are required to develop and distribute in Korea a version of Windows XP and its successors that does not include Windows Media Player or Windows Messenger functionality. In addition, we may also distribute a second modifiedversion of Windows that contains the removed functionality, provided the second version includes promotional links in the user interface that will enable consumers to link to and download a select group of competing media players and instantmessengers. The order also prohibits us from 12 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) (Unaudited) including Windows Media Player or Windows Messenger, or any feature with similar functionality, in any product for which we have a 50% or greater marketshare. A supervisory board will be appointed to determine the specifics of the remedy and to oversee compliance. We have appealed the KFTC s decision to the Seoul High Court and have also sought reconsideration before the KFTC. Although we havenot yet determined how the Commission s ruling will affect our business in Korea, the announced remedies do not prevent us from distributing Windows in Korea. In other ongoing investigations, various foreign governments and several state Attorneys General have requested informationfrom us concerning competition, privacy, and security issues. Antitrust, and unfair competition, and overcharge class actions. A large number of antitrust and unfair competition class action lawsuits have been filed against us in various state and federal courts on behalf of variously definedclasses of direct and indirect purchasers of our personal computer ( PC ) operating system and certain software applications products. The federal cases have been consolidated in the U.S. District Court for Maryland. These cases allegethat we competed unfairly and unlawfully monopolized alleged markets for operating systems and certain software applications, and they seek to recover alleged overcharges for these products. To date, courts have dismissed all claims for damages incases brought against us by indirect purchasers under federal law and in 18 states. Ten of those state court decisions have been affirmed on appeal. There was no appeal in five states. In addition, courts in two states refused to certify classes,essentially bringing the litigation to a close. Claims under federal law brought on behalf of foreign purchasers have been dismissed by the U.S. District Court in Maryland as have all claims brought on behalf of consumers seeking injunctive reliefunder federal law. The ruling on injunctive relief and the ruling dismissing the federal claims of indirect purchasers were appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, together with a ruling denying certification ofcertain proposed classes of U.S. direct purchasers. On April 18, 2006, the Court of Appeals affirmed the trial court decision dismissing the indirect purchaser claims. Courts in 18 states have ruled that indirect purchaser cases may proceed as classactions, while courts in two states have denied class certification. In 2003, we reached an agreement with counsel for the California plaintiffs to settle all claims in 27 consolidated cases in that state. Under the settlement, class members will beable to obtain vouchers that entitle the class members to be reimbursed up to the face value of their vouchers for purchases of a wide variety of platform-neutral computer hardware and software. The total value of vouchers issued will depend on thenumber of class members who make a claim and are issued vouchers. Two-thirds of the value of vouchers unissued or unredeemed by class members will be made available to certain schools in California in the form of vouchers that also may be redeemedfor cash against purchases of a wide variety of platform-neutral computer hardware, software, and related services. We also have reached similar agreements to settle all claims in a number of other states. The settlements in these states arestructured similarly to the California settlement, except that, among other differences, one-half of the value of vouchers unissued to class members will be made available to certain schools in the relevant states. The maximum value of vouchers tobe issued in these settlements, including the California settlement, is approximately $2.5 billion. The actual costs of these settlements will be less than that maximum amount, depending on the number of class members and schools who are issued andredeem vouchers. The settlements in Arizona, California, the District of Columbia, Florida, Kansas, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, New Mexico, North Carolina, North Dakota, South Dakota, Tennessee, Vermont, and West Virginia havereceived final court approval. We have reached preliminary settlements in New York and Wisconsin. We estimate the total cost to resolve all of these cases will range between $1.4 billion and $1.6 billion, with the actual cost dependent upon manyunknown factors such as the quantity and mix of products for which claims will be made, the number of eligible class members who ultimately use the vouchers, the nature of hardware and software that is acquired using the vouchers, and the cost ofadministering the claims process. In accordance with SFAS No. 5, Accounting for Contingencies , and Financial Accounting Standards Board 13 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) (Unaudited) Interpretation ( FIN ) 14, Reasonable Estimation of the Amount of a Loss, at March 31, 2006, we have recorded a liability related tothese claims of approximately $1.2 billion, net of payments made to date primarily for administrative expenses and legal fees. Other antitrust litigation and claims. On August 27, 2004, the City and County of San Francisco, the City of Los Angeles, and Los Angeles, SanMateo, Contra Costa, and Santa Clara Counties filed a putative class action against us in San Francisco Superior Court. The action was brought on behalf of all governmental entities, agencies, and political subdivisions of the State of Californiathat indirectly purchased our operating system or word processing and spreadsheet software during the period from February 18, 1995 to the date of trial in the action. The plaintiffs sought treble damages under California s Cartwright Actand disgorgement of unlawful profits under its Unfair Competition Act resulting from our alleged combinations to restrain trade, deny competition, and monopolize the world markets for PC operating systems and word processing and spreadsheetapplications (and productivity suites including these applications). We removed the case to the U.S. District Court for Maryland. Our motion to dismiss the complaint was granted on April 18, 2005 with leave to file an amended complaint allegingclaims under the Cartwright Act based on conduct within the four-year statute of limitation the court ruled applies to the plaintiffs claims. We have entered into a tentative settlement of this case that has been approved by all namedplaintiffs. If approved by the court, this settlement will resolve all claims asserted in the lawsuit. On November 12, 2004, Novell, Inc. filed a complaint in the U.S. District Court for Utah asserting antitrust and unfair competition claims against usrelated to Novell s ownership of WordPerfect and other productivity applications during the period between June 1994 and March 1996. On June 10, 2005, the trial court granted our motion to dismiss four of six claims of the complaint. Anappeal of that ruling is now pending and the case is effectively stayed during the appeal. Patent and intellectual property claims. We are a defendant in more than 35 patent infringement cases that we are defending vigorously. In the case of Eolas Technologies, Inc. and University of California v.Microsoft , filed in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Illinois on February 2, 1999, the plaintiffs alleged infringement by the browser functionality of Windows. On August 11, 2003, the jury awarded the plaintiffsapproximately $520 million in damages for infringement from the date the plaintiffs patent was issued through September 2001. The plaintiffs are seeking an equitable accounting for damages from September 2001 to the present. OnJanuary 14, 2004, the trial court entered final judgment of $565 million, including post-trial interest of $45 million, and entered an injunction against distribution of any new infringing products, but stayed execution of the judgment and theinjunction pending our appeal. We appealed and on March 2, 2005 the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit reversed the decision and vacated the judgment, ruling that the trial court had erred in excluding certain previous art evidence andruling as a matter of law on other evidence. The appellate court also reversed the trial court s decision that the inventors had not engaged in inequitable conduct by failing to reveal material previous art while obtaining the patent. Webelieve the total cost to resolve this case will not be material to our financial position or results of operations. The actual costs will be dependent upon many unknown factors such as the events of a retrial of the plaintiff s claims. In Research Corporation Technologies, Inc. v. Microsoft , filed in U.S. District Court for the District of Arizona on December 21, 2001, the plaintiff has asserted three patents related to half-toning, which it believes are infringed bycertain printing functionality allegedly present in different versions of Windows. Plaintiff seeks unspecified reasonable royalties on our Windows products. Our defense based on the plaintiff s inequitable conduct was tried inAugust 2005. In November 2005, the court announced its finding that the inventors engaged in inequitable conduct and that the patents are therefore unenforceable against us. We anticipate the plaintiff will appeal. In Microsoft v. Lucent ,filed in the U.S. District Court in San Diego on April 8, 2003, we are seeking a declaratory judgment that we do 14 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) (Unaudited) not infringe any valid patent among a number of patents Lucent has been asserting against computer manufacturers that sell computers with our softwarepre-installed. No trial date has been set. On March 28, 2006, Lucent filed a lawsuit against us in U.S. District Court in San Diego, claiming that Xbox 360 violates one of the patents at issue in the case we filed. In Amado v. Microsoft ,filed in U.S. District Court for the Central District of California on March 7, 2003, the plaintiff has accused the link table functionality available in Microsoft Access when used with Microsoft Excel. After a jury trial, we were found toinfringe one claim of the patent and damages of $8.9 million were awarded. The judge later found for us on our defense of laches, which reduced the damages award to $5.9 million. The court also imposed an injunction against further distribution ofthe accused feature as part of Microsoft Access, but stayed the injunction pending appellate review. In Z4 Technologies, Inc. v. Microsoft, the plaintiff alleged that Microsoft Windows and Office product activation functionality violates itspatent rights. On April 19, 2006, the jury rendered a $115 million verdict against us. The trial court has not yet ruled on our defense of inequitable conduct or the plaintiff s request for an injunction and enhancement of damages for willfulinfringement. We intend to appeal the verdict. A software company has discussed with us claims of trade secret misappropriation, breach of contract, and patent infringement. These claims primarily relate to certain functionality in our serveroperating system products but also impact our desktop operating systems. Adverse outcomes in some or all of the matters described in this paragraph may result in significant monetary damages or injunctive relief against us, adversely affectingdistribution of our operating system or application products. The risks associated with an adverse decision may result in material settlements. Other. We are also subject to a variety of other claims and suits that arise from time to time in the ordinary course of our business. Whilemanagement currently believes that resolving claims against us, individually or in aggregate, will not have a material adverse impact on our financial position or our results of operations, these matters are subject to inherent uncertainties andmanagement s view of these matters may change in the future. As of March 31, 2006, we had accrued aggregate liabilities totaling $0.9 billion in other current liabilities and $1.0 billion in other long-term liabilities for all of the contingent matters described in this note. While we intend tovigorously defend these matters, there exists the possibility of adverse outcomes which we estimate could be up to $1.5 billion in aggregate beyond recorded amounts. Were an unfavorable final outcome to occur, there exists the possibility of amaterial adverse impact on the Company s financial position and on the results of operations for the period in which the effect becomes reasonably estimable. Note 9 Segment Information SFAS No. 131, Disclosures about Segments of an Enterprise and Related Information , requires segmentation based on our internal organizationand reporting of revenue and operating income based upon internal accounting methods. Our financial reporting systems present various data for management to run the business, including internal profit and loss statements prepared on a basis notconsistent with U.S. GAAP. We previously announced a plan to reorganize the company into three operating divisions Microsoft Platform Products and Services Division, Microsoft Business Division, and Microsoft Entertainment and DevicesDivision. We expect to complete any changes in internal financial management and reporting as a result of the reorganization by the beginning of fiscal year 2007. The impact on reporting segments, if any, will be reflected at the time. In theinterim, we continue to organize, manage, and report the business through the seven segments. 15 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) (Unaudited) Segment revenue and operating income/(loss) is as follows (1): Operating costs included in one segment may benefit other segments, andtherefore these segments are not designed to measure operating income or loss directly related to the products included in each segment. Intersegment cost commissions are estimated by management and used to compensate or charge each segment for suchshared costs and to incent shared efforts. 16 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) (Unaudited) Reconciling amounts include adjustments to conform significant internal accounting policies with U.S.GAAP and corporate level activity not specifically attributed to a segment. Certain revenue and expenses, including legal settlements and legal contingencies, are excluded from segments or included in corporate-level activity. Significantreconciling items to arrive at operating income are as follows: Note 10 Goodwill The amount of goodwill resulting from acquisitions duringthe nine months ended March 31, 2006 related to the following: All of the entities were consolidated with Microsoft since their respective acquisition dates. The purchase price allocations for these acquisitions arepreliminary and subject to revision as more detailed analyses are completed and additional information about fair value of assets and liabilities becomes available. Any change in the fair value of the net assets of the acquired companies will changethe amount of the purchase price allocable to goodwill. Pro forma results of operations have not been presented because the effects of these acquisitions, individually and in the aggregate, were not material. Note 11 Subsequent Events On April 19, 2006, the jury in the Z4 Technologies, Inc. v.Microsoft patent infringement case (see Note 8 Contingencies) rendered a $115 million verdict against us. The trial court has not yet ruled on our defense of inequitable conduct or the plaintiff s request for an injunction andenhancement of damages for willful infringement. We intend to appeal the verdict. 17 Table of Contents REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM To The Board of Directors and Stockholders of Microsoft Corporation Redmond, Washington We havereviewed the accompanying consolidated balance sheet of Microsoft Corporation and subsidiaries as of March 31, 2006, and the related consolidated statements of income, stockholders equity, and cash flows for the three-month and nine-monthperiods ended March 31, 2006 and 2005. These interim financial statements are the responsibility of the Corporation s management. We conducted our reviews in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). A review of interim financialinformation consists principally of applying analytical procedures and making inquiries of persons responsible for financial and accounting matters. It is substantially less in scope than an audit conducted in accordance with the standards of thePublic Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States), the objective of which is the expression of an opinion regarding the financial statements taken as a whole. Accordingly, we do not express such an opinion. Based on our reviews, we are not aware of any material modifications thatshould be made to such consolidated interim financial statements for them to be in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. We have previously audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (UnitedStates), the consolidated balance sheet of Microsoft Corporation and subsidiaries as of June 30, 2005, and the related consolidated statements of income, stockholders equity, and cash flows for the year then ended (not presented herein);and in our report dated August 23, 2005, we expressed an unqualified opinion on those consolidated financial statements. In our opinion, the information set forth in the accompanying consolidated balance sheet as of June 30, 2005 is fairlystated, in all material respects, in relation to the consolidated balance sheet from which it has been derived. DELOITTE TOUCHE LLP /s/ D ELOITTE T OUCHE LLP Seattle, Washington April 25, 2006 18 Table of Contents °Item 2. Management s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Special Note About Forward-Looking Statements Certain statements in Management s Discussion and Analysis ( MD A ), other than purely historical information, including estimates,projections, statements relating to our business plans, objectives, and expected operating results, and the assumptions upon which those statements are based, are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private SecuritiesLitigation Reform Act of 1995, Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. These forward-looking statements generally are identified by the words believes, project, expects, anticipates, estimates, intends, strategy, plan, may, will, would, will be, willcontinue, will likely result, and similar expressions. Forward-looking statements are based on current expectations and assumptions that are subject to risks and uncertainties which may cause actual results to differ materiallyfrom the forward-looking statements. We undertake no obligation to update or revise publicly any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. OVERVIEW The following MD A is intended to help the reader understand the results of operations and financial condition ofMicrosoft Corporation. This MD A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our financial statements and the accompanying notes to the financial statements. We develop, manufacture, license, and support a wide range of softwareproducts for many computing devices. Our software products include operating systems for servers, personal computers ( PCs ) and intelligent devices; server applications for distributed computing environments; information workerproductivity applications; business solutions applications; and software development tools. We provide consulting and product support services and we train and certify system integrators and developers. We sell the Xbox video game console and games,PC games, and PC peripherals. We deliver online communication and information services through our MSN portals and channels around the world. Our revenue historically has fluctuated quarterly and has been highest in the second quarter of our fiscal year, generally due to corporate calendaryear-end spending trends in our major markets and holiday season spending by consumers. Our Home and Entertainment segment is particularly subject to seasonality as its products are aimed at the consumer market and are in highest demand during theholiday shopping season. Historically, Home and Entertainment revenue generated in our second fiscal quarter has comprised over 40% of yearly segment revenues, and we believe the seasonality of revenue is likely to continue in the future, however weexpect the percentage to vary due to the launch of Xbox 360 in fiscal year 2006. We intend to sustain the long-term growth of our businesses through technological innovation, engineering excellence, and a commitment to delivering high-quality products and services to customers and partners.Recognizing that one of our primary challenges is to help accelerate worldwide PC adoption and software upgrades, we continue to advance the functionality, security, and value of Windows operating systems, including versions for new devices such asTablet PCs, Media Center PCs, Portable Media Centers, and mobile devices such as Smartphones. We are increasing our focus on emerging markets and reducing the amount of unlicensed software in those markets. In addition, we develop innovativesoftware applications and solutions to enhance the productivity of information workers, improve communication and collaboration in work groups, aid business intelligence, and streamline processes for small and mid-sized businesses. To sustain thegrowth of our Server and Tools business amid competition from other vendors of both proprietary and open source software, our goal is to deliver products that provide the best platform for network computing the most advanced, easiest todeploy and manage, and most secure, with the lowest total cost of ownership. 19 Table of Contents Worldwide macroeconomic factors have a strong correlation to business and consumer demand for oursoftware, services, games, and Internet service offerings. We continue to expect that general macroeconomic conditions will remain stable in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2006. Summary Our revenue increasefor the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006 was driven primarily by the second quarter launch of Xbox 360, increased licensing of Windows Server operating systems, SQL Server, and other server applications, growth in licensing of WindowsClient operating systems through original equipment manufacturers ( OEMs ), and increased licensing of Office and other Information Worker products. Based on our preliminary estimates, total worldwide PC shipments from all sources grew 12%to 13% from the third quarter of the previous year and 14% to 15% from the first nine months of the previous year, driven by strong consumer demand in both emerging and mature markets. Overall server hardware shipments growth in the third quarterand the first nine months of fiscal year 2006 was consistent with our previous full year estimate of 11% to 13%. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates accounted for a $112 million or 1 percentage point decrease in revenue for the three monthsended March 31, 2006 and had an insignificant impact on revenue for the nine months ended March 31, 2006. For the three months ended March 31, 2006, operating income increased primarily reflecting the revenue increase and a $438 million decrease in costsfor legal settlements and legal contingencies. These changes were partially offset by a $665 million increase in cost of revenue primarily as a result of Xbox 360 and a $292 million increase in sales and marketing expenses as a result of productlaunch-related spending and Windows Vista pre-launch advertising and marketing programs. For the nine months ended March 31, 2006, operating income increased primarily reflecting increased Server and Tools and Client revenue, which have highergross margins, and reflecting a $612 million decrease in costs for legal settlements and legal contingencies. These changes were partially offset by increased sales and marketing expenses related to the upcoming product launch of Windows Vista andrecently completed product launches of SQL Server 2005, Visual Studio 2005, and Xbox 360, and increased product costs associated with Xbox 360. Headcount-related costs, including stock-based compensation expense, increased $189 million and$422 million, respectively, for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006, resulting from both an increase in salaries and benefits for existing headcount and a 15% increase in headcount over the past twelve months. Stock-basedcompensation expense decreased $243 million and $561 million, respectively, during the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006 reflecting a continuing decline in stock option amortization expense. We expect this trend tocontinue in the remainder of fiscal year 2006 and into fiscal year 2007. We expect revenue to grow at a faster rate during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2006 than the fourth quarter or fiscal year 2005, mainly reflecting significant product launches in fiscal year 2006. We estimateworldwide PC shipments will grow 12% to 14% and overall server hardware shipments will also grow 11% to 13% in fiscal year 2006. We expect our operating income growth rate in the fourth quarter to exceed our revenue growth rate. Operating income is expected to reflect lower costsfor legal settlements and legal contingencies than in fiscal year 2005. This is expected to be partially offset by the increase in expenses associated with recently launched products and upcoming products and investments. 20 Table of Contents SEGMENT PRODUCT REVENUE/OPERATING INCOME (LOSS) Our seven segments currently are Client; Server and Tools; Information Worker; Microsoft Business Solutions; MSN; Mobile andEmbedded Devices; and Home and Entertainment. In order toexecute our software and services strategy with greater agility, we previously announced a plan to reorganize the company into three operating divisions Microsoft Platform Products and Services Division, Microsoft Business Division, andMicrosoft Entertainment and Devices Division. The new Microsoft Platform Products and Services Division is comprised of Client, Server and Tools, and MSN. The Information Worker business and Microsoft Business Solutions combined to form theMicrosoft Business Division. The new Microsoft Entertainment and Devices Division brought together Home and Entertainment and Mobile and Embedded Devices. We expect to complete any changes in internal financial management and reporting as a resultof the reorganization by the beginning of fiscal year 2007. The impact on reporting segments, if any, will be reflected at that time. In the interim, we continue to organize, manage, and report the business through the seven segments. Revenue and operating income/(loss) amounts in this section are presented ona basis consistent with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles ( GAAP ) and include certain reconciling items attributable to each of the segments. Segment information appearing in Note 9 Segment Information of the Notes toFinancial Statements is presented on a basis consistent with the Company s current internal management reporting, in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ) No. 131, Disclosures about Segments ofan Enterprise and Related Information . Certain corporate level expenses have been excluded from our segment operating results and are analyzed separately. Prior amounts have been restated for certain internal reorganizations and to conform tothe current period presentation. Headcount expenses related to cost of revenue are not included in the discussion of headcount-related costs in this section. Client Client consists ofpremium edition operating systems, including Windows XP Professional, Media Center Edition, Tablet PC Edition, and other standard Windows operating systems, including Windows XP Home. Premium offerings are Windows operating systems sold at a premiumabove Windows XP Home. Client revenue growth correlates with the growth of purchases of PCs from OEMs that pre-install versions of Windows operating systems because the OEM channel accounts for over 80% of total Client revenue. Client revenue increased during the third quarter of fiscal year 2006reflecting $254 million or 10% growth in OEM revenue driven by 16% growth in OEM license units from increased PC unit shipments, partially offset by a $31 million or 6% decrease in revenue from commercial and retail licensing of Windows operatingsystems. This decrease in commercial and retail licensing reflects our customers continued preference for acquiring the next version of their operating system through the OEM channel when they replace their PC hardware, rather than purchasinga multi-year licensing agreement or purchasing at retail. The difference between unit growth rates and revenue growth rates from quarter to quarter is driven by the channel mix of products sold by large, multinational OEMs versus those sold by localand regional system builders, the mix of premium versions of operating systems licensed during the quarter, and changes in geographical mix. The mix of OEM Windows premium edition operating systems licensed as a percentage of total OEM Windowsoperating systems licensed increased four percentage points to 53% of total OEM Windows operating systems for the three months ended March 31, 2006 as compared to the three months ended March 31, 2005. This OEM premium mix reflects the 21 Table of Contents effects of an increase in the mix of Windows XP Media Center Edition licenses offset by a decrease in the mix of Windows XP Professional licenses which aregenerally sold at a higher price point. Client revenue increased in the nine months ended March 31, 2006 reflecting Windows OEM license unit growth of 16%, which drove an $846 million or 11% increase in OEM revenue compared to the correspondingperiod in the prior year, which was partially offset by a $150 million or 10% decline in commercial and retail licensing revenue. Client operating income increased during the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006 primarily reflecting the increase in OEM revenue partiallyoffset by a $68 million increase in the third quarter and a $225 million increase in the first nine months in sales and marketing expenses, excluding headcount-related costs, mainly driven by increased investments in partner marketing andWindows Vista pre-launch programs. Headcount-related costs increased 6% and 5%, respectively, in the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006 reflecting both an increase in salaries and benefits for existing headcount and a 14% increase inheadcount primarily associated with Windows Vista and further investments in our sales and marketing organization, partially offset by a decrease in stock-based compensation expense. We anticipate that total PC shipments will grow approximately 10% to 11% in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2006, and willcontinue to be the primary factor influencing growth in Client revenue. In addition, we estimate that increasing shipments of laptops as a percentage of total PC systems will continue to positively influence Client revenue growth due to the shorterreplacement cycles for laptops compared to desktop PCs. The time between operating system releases, and the prospective launch of our Windows Vista operating system in fiscal year 2007, may impact our ability to close on some multi-year licensingagreements. We expect emerging markets to continue to outpace mature market growth rates. Piracy continues to be a challenge in both emerging and mature markets. We are focusing on growing OEM licenses faster than the overall market by driving forgains against piracy through initiatives such as Windows Genuine Advantage and through joint programs with channel partners. Client commercial and retail licensing revenues are expected to continue to lag behind overall Client revenue growth. Weplan to continue our efforts to increase premium product mix. We anticipate shipments of the premium-priced Windows XP Media Center Edition will continue to grow as a percentage of total operating systems shipped. We expect Client operating expensesto increase during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2006 due to continued investment in headcount related to development of Windows Vista and increases in joint marketing programs with our OEM partners. Server and Tools Server and Toolsconsists of server software licenses and client access licenses ( CALs ) for Windows Server, Microsoft SQL Server, Exchange Server, and other server products. It also includes developer tools, training, certification, Microsoft Press,Premier and Professional product support services, and Microsoft Consulting Services. Server and Tools concentrates on licensing products, applications, tools, content, and services that make information technology professionals and developers moreproductive and efficient. The segment uses multiple channels for licensing including pre-installed OEM versions, licenses through partners, and licenses directly to end customers. The licenses are sold both as one-time licenses and as multi-yearvolume licenses. Server and Tools uses product innovation and partnerships with information technology professionals to drive the adoption and sales growth of its products. Server and Tools revenue increased during the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006 mainly driven by growth inWindows Server licensing and strength of SQL Server 2005 following its launch in the second 22 Table of Contents quarter of this fiscal year. Server and Server application revenue, including CAL revenue, grew $347 million or 17% during the third quarter and $875 millionor 14% during the first nine months of fiscal year 2006. The results reflect broad adoption of Windows Server System products, especially SQL Server, which grew over 30% for the quarter and 25% year to date. Consulting and Premier and Professionalproduct support services revenue increased $39 million or 10% in the third quarter and $166 million or 15% in the first nine months of fiscal year 2006. Included in the amounts above are changes in foreign currency exchange rates which accounted fora $31 million or one percentage point decrease in revenue for the three months ended March 31, 2006 and had an insignificant impact on revenue for the nine months ended March 31, 2006. Server and Tools operating income increased during the three and nine monthsended March 31, 2006 primarily reflecting increased revenue, partially offset by increased sales and marketing costs. Sales and marketing costs, excluding headcount-related costs, increased $56 million and $253 million, respectively, in thethree and nine months ended March 31, 2006 primarily due to marketing expenses related to the launch of SQL Server 2005 and Visual Studio 2005 and expenses to support long term business strategies. Headcount-related costs increased 6% and 5%,respectively, in the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006 reflecting both an increase in salaries and benefits for existing headcount and a 13% increase in headcount partially offset by a decrease in stock-based compensation expense. We continue to expect overall server hardware shipments togrow approximately 11% to 13% in fiscal year 2006. However, we face strong competition from Linux-based, Unix, and other server operating systems as well as competition in server applications. We also expect Server and Tools operating expenses toincrease during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2006 due to continued investment in headcount. Information Worker Information Workerconsists of the Microsoft Office system of programs, servers, services, and solutions designed to increase personal, team, and organization productivity. Information Worker includes Microsoft Office, Microsoft Project, Microsoft Visio, SharePointPortal Server CALs, and other information worker products including Microsoft LiveMeeting and OneNote. Our Office system offerings generate over 85% of Information Worker revenue. Revenue growth depends on the ability to add value to the core Officeproduct set and expand our product offerings in other information worker areas such as document lifecycle management, collaboration, and business intelligence. Information Worker revenue increased during the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006 primarily reflecting growth in volume licensing, retailpackaged products, and preinstalled versions of Office in Japan of $124 million or 5% and $377 million or 5%, respectively. OEM revenue increased 4% and 2%, respectively, for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006. Included in theamounts above are changes in foreign currency exchange rates which contributed a $37 million or one percentage point decrease in revenue for the three months ended March 31, 2006 and had an insignificant impact on revenue for the nine monthsended March 31, 2006. Information Worker operating incomeincreased during the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006 reflecting the revenue growth, partially offset by a $38 million and $193 million, respectively, increase in sales and marketing costs, excluding headcount-related costs. Thisincrease in sales and marketing costs reflects increased field sales activities, advertising and product launch preparation costs. Headcount-related costs increased 19% and 14%, respectively, during the three and nine months ended March 31,2006 reflecting both an 23 Table of Contents increase in salaries and benefits for existing headcount and a 19% increase in headcount related to supporting field sales efforts and research anddevelopment investments in future products, partially offset by a decrease in stock-based compensation expense. We expect sustained momentum during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2006 in our multi-year licensing offerings and increased sales of Office 2003. Wecontinue to develop plans to drive revenue growth in new areas such as the Office Live web-based servicesoffering; however, we do not anticipate a significant impact on overall revenue from these areas until future fiscal years. We also expect Information Worker operating expenses to increase during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2006 due tocontinued investment in headcount in both research and development and the field sales force. Microsoft Business Solutions Microsoft BusinessSolutions provides business management software solutions targeted to businesses of varying sizes. The main products consist of enterprise resource planning ( ERP ) solutions, customer relationship management ( CRM ) software,retail solutions, Microsoft Partner Program and related services. Microsoft Business Solutions also includes the Small and Mid-market Solutions Partners organization, which focuses on sales to customers and partners in the small andmid-market customer segments. Revenue is derived from software and services sales, with software sales representing a large majority of total revenue. Software revenues include both new software licenses and enhancement plans, which providecustomers with future software upgrades over the period of the plan. Our solutions are delivered through a worldwide network of channel partners that provide services and local support. Microsoft Business Solutions revenue increased during the three months ended March 31, 2006 reflecting 28% growth inlicense revenue, primarily in the Dynamics ERP product lines, and 13% growth in enhancement plan revenue, while services revenue increased 15%. For the first nine months of fiscal year 2006, the 18% revenue increase was primarily due to 20% growthin license revenue and 17% growth in enhancement plan revenue from our Dynamics ERP and CRM solutions, while services revenue increased approximately 7%. Microsoft Business Solutions operating loss decreased for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006 reflecting the increase in revenue partiallyoffset by an increase in sales and marketing expense. The increase in sales and marketing expense was primarily due to additional marketing spend as we continue to invest in demand creation and channel development. Headcount-related costs increased2% and 3%, respectively, in the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006 reflecting both an increase in salaries and benefits for existing headcount and a 10% increase in headcount partially offset by a decrease in stock-based compensationexpense. We expect continued revenue growth through theMicrosoft Business Solutions portfolio of business solutions through the end of the year. Continued investments in the next generation of solutions, broader geographical coverage, and plans to facilitate our partners providing customized verticalsolutions are expected to result in continued reduction in the Microsoft Business Solutions operating loss in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2006 and into fiscal year 2007. 24 Table of Contents MSN MSN includes personalcommunications services, such as e-mail and instant messaging, and online information offerings such as MSN Search, MapPoint, and the MSN portals and channels around the world. MSN also provides a variety of online paid services in addition to MSNInternet Access and MSN Premium Web Services. Revenue is derived primarily from advertisers on MSN, from consumers and partners through subscriptions and transactions generated from online paid services, and from subscribers to MSN NarrowbandInternet Access. We launched MSN adCenter our internally developed advertising platform in certain international markets in the first half of fiscal year 2006, and are currently testing this new platform in the United States. Webelieve MSN adCenter will enable us to increase both display and search advertising revenues by reducing our reliance on third parties for delivering ads. Effective July 1, 2005, functions related to MapPoint previously reported in Mobile andEmbedded Devices were moved to MSN. Mobile and Embedded Devices and MSN operating results for the prior periods have been restated for this reorganization. In November 2005, Microsoft announced Windows Live , which is a set of Internet servicesand software designed to bring together user relationships, information, and interests, with enhanced safety and security across PCs, devices, and the Web. Some Windows Live services entered an early beta phase in the second and third quartersof fiscal year 2006. MSN revenue decreased during the threeand nine months ended March 31, 2006 primarily due to a decline of $53 million or 31% in Internet Access revenue for the third quarter and $182 million or 31% for the first nine months ended March 31, 2006. Internet Access revenuedecreased as subscribers decreased to 2.3 million at March 31, 2006 from 3.0 million at March 31, 2005 reflecting the continued migration to broadband or other competitively priced Internet service providers. Revenue fromsubscriptions and transactions services other than Internet Access increased $8 million or 13% in the third quarter and $29 million or 16% in the nine months ended March 31, 2006. As of March 31, 2006, MSN had approximately241 million active Hotmail accounts and approximately 230 million active Messenger accounts, as compared to 200 million and 165 million at March 31, 2005. In addition, at March 31, 2006, MSN had 10.1 milliontotal subscribers compared to 9.1 million at the end of the third quarter of the prior year. Advertising revenue increased $25 million or 7% in the third quarter and $125 million or 13% in the nine months ended March 31, 2006 due primarilyto growth in display advertising for portals, channels, email, and messaging services, which was partially offset by a decline in both periods in search revenue due to the ramp up of adCenter. MSN operating income decreased during the three and nine months endedMarch 31, 2006 primarily reflecting the decline in revenue and an increase in research and development costs as we continue to invest in MSN adCenter and other new platforms. Headcount-related costs increased 27% and 18%, respectively, duringthe three and nine months ended March 31, 2006 reflecting both an increase in salaries and benefits for existing headcount and a 35% increase in headcount partially offset by a decrease in stock-based compensation expense. MSN expects increased growth in display advertising revenue as the portals,channels, and communications services continue to expand globally and the overall Internet advertising industry continues to expand. However, we expect overall advertising growth to continue to be tempered by the launch and ramp-up of adCenter andthe related pressure on our search advertising prices. We expect revenue from narrowband Internet Access to continue to decline in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2006. The profitability decline experienced in the third quarter of fiscal year 2006will likely continue for the remainder of fiscal year 2006 as investments are made in the development of new applications and services, Search and adCenter, and expanding the field sales force. In addition, MSN may make investments in improving theuser experience and in some cases reducing the number 25 Table of Contents of advertisements delivered either via our search tools or via our Internet portals, thereby helping to sustain and grow our user base. Mobile and Embedded Devices Mobile and EmbeddedDevices includes Windows Mobile software, Windows Embedded operating systems, and Windows Automotive. These products extend the advantages of the Windows platform to mobile devices such as PDAs, phones, and a wide range of embedded devices. Thebusiness is also responsible for managing sales and customer relationships for Microsoft overall with device manufacturers and communication sector customers. The communication sector includes network service providers (such as wireless, wirelineand cable operators) and media and entertainment companies. The market for products in these segments is intensely competitive. Competitive alternatives vary based on product lines and include product offerings from commercial and non-commercialmobile operating system providers, and proprietary software developed by OEMs and mobile operators. Short product life cycles in product lines such as Windows Mobile software may impact our continuing revenue streams. Effective July 1, 2005,functions related to MapPoint previously reported in Mobile and Embedded Devices have been moved to MSN. Mobile and Embedded Devices and MSN operating results for the prior periods have been restated for this reorganization. Mobile and Embedded Devices revenue grew during the three and nine monthsended March 31, 2006 primarily reflecting unit volume increases in all major product lines, especially Windows Mobile software sales and Windows Embedded operating systems. Windows Mobile software revenue increased reflecting increased marketdemand for cellular connected mobile devices such as phone-enabled PDAs and Smartphones, partially offset by a reduction in unit shipments for stand-alone PDAs. Revenue for Windows Mobile software increased $17 million or 52% and revenue for WindowsEmbedded operating systems increased $9 million or 35% for the three months ended March 31, 2006. Revenue for Windows Mobile software increased $39 million or 37% and revenue for Windows Embedded operating systems increased $37 million or 51%compared to the first nine months of the prior year. Mobileand Embedded Devices operating income decreased for the three months ended March 31, 2006 primarily reflecting increased costs for marketing and product development. For the nine months ended March 31, 2006, operating income increased dueto increased revenue partially offset by an increase in headcount-related costs. Headcount-related costs increased 15% and 12%, respectively, during the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006 reflecting both an increase in salaries andbenefits for existing headcount and a 25% increase in headcount partially offset by a decrease in stock-based compensation expense. We expect revenue for Mobile and Embedded Devices to continue to grow in the remainder of fiscal year 2006 driven by an overall increase in customerdemand for connectivity, and an increase in the number of new devices incorporating Windows Mobile software and new devices being offered by OEMs incorporating Windows Embedded operating systems. We also expect Mobile and Embedded Devices operatingexpenses to continue to increase during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2006 due to continued investment in headcount, marketing and product development. 26 Table of Contents Home and Entertainment Home and Entertainmentincludes the Microsoft Xbox video game console system, PC games, the Home Products Division, and TV platform products for the interactive television industry. The success of video game consoles is determined by console functionality, the portfolioof video game content for the console, online services, and the market share of the console. Our Xbox business is transitioning to a new console, the Xbox 360, which launched in the second quarter of fiscal year 2006. We believe that thefunctionality of our new console, portfolio of games, and online services are well-positioned relative to forthcoming competitive consoles. We also believe launching in advance of competitive consoles will provide a strategic advantage for thelong-term success of Xbox 360. Revenue from the first generation of Xbox products has declined and is expected to continue to decline as a result of the introduction of Xbox 360. Home and Entertainment revenue increased during the third quarter of fiscal year 2006 primarily reflecting an increase inXbox revenue of $475 million or 133%. Xbox revenue increased mainly due to the shipment of 1.75 million Xbox 360 consoles, which exceeded the number of first generation consoles sold in the prior year. In addition, Xbox 360 consoles sell at ahigher average price than first generation consoles. Home and Entertainment revenue increased for the first nine months of fiscal year 2006 driven by the launch of Xbox 360 and the strength of new PC games, especially Age of Empires III .Revenue from the 3.25 million Xbox 360 consoles shipped since its launch more than offset the approximate $300 million impact of Halo2 sales in fiscal year 2005. Home and Entertainment operating loss in the third quarter and first nine months of fiscal year 2006 increased primarily dueto an increase in product costs and sales and marketing expenses related to the Xbox 360 and due to the significant margin generated by Halo2 in fiscal year 2005. Our business model anticipates that while we currently sell Xbox 360 consoles at anegative margin, product cost reductions and the future margins on sales of games and other products will enable us to achieve a positive margin over the Xbox 360 console lifecycle. The first generation Xbox consoles continue to have negativemargins. Headcount-related costs increased 5% and 3%, respectively, in the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006 reflecting both an increase in salaries and benefits for existing headcount and a 14% increase in headcount partially offsetby a decrease in stock-based compensation expense. In fiscalyear 2006, we expect Xbox console unit volumes and revenue to increase from fiscal year 2005 due to the launch of Xbox 360. In fiscal year 2006, we expect PC games revenue to increase from fiscal year 2005 driven by the availability of more new gametitles. We expect operating expenses and operating loss to increase as a result of Xbox 360 launch-related activities and Xbox 360 console costs. Revenue from the previous generation of Xbox products decreased and is expected to continue to decreasedue to the launch of Xbox 360. Corporate-Level Expenses Certaincorporate-level expenses are not allocated to our segments. Those expenses primarily include corporate operations related to broad-based sales and marketing, product support services, human resources, 27 Table of Contents legal, finance, information technology, corporate development and procurement activities, research and development and other costs, and legal settlements andcontingencies. Corporate-level expenses in the third quarterand first nine months of fiscal year 2006 decreased primarily due to a decrease in charges for legal settlements and legal contingencies offset by increased information technology costs. Legal charges decreased $438 million and $612 million,respectively, during the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006. In the third quarter of fiscal year 2006, we incurred $397 million in legal charges related primarily to antitrust and unfair competition consumer class actions, intellectualproperty claims, and an extension payment to Sun Microsystems, Inc. under our existing Limited Patent Covenant and Standstill Agreement, as compared to $835 million in legal charges in the prior year related primarily to settlements with Gateway,Inc. and Burst.com, an extension payment to Sun Microsystems, and $550 million in charges related to antitrust and other matters. We incurred $913 million in legal charges primarily related to our settlement with RealNetworks, Inc. as well as otherintellectual property and antitrust matters during the nine months ended March 31, 2006, as compared to approximately $1.5 billion of legal charges in the prior year primarily related to settlements with Novell, Inc. and Gateway and otherantitrust matters. Headcount-related costs increased 5% and 3%, respectively, during the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006 reflecting both an increase in salaries and benefits for existing headcount and a 21% increase in headcountpartially offset by a decrease in stock-based compensation expense. Cost of Revenue Cost of revenueincludes manufacturing and distribution costs for products sold and programs licensed, operating costs related to product support service centers and product distribution centers, costs incurred to support and maintain Internet-based products andservices, and costs associated with the delivery of consulting services. Cost of revenue increased mainly due to a $658 million and $957 million increase in Home and Entertainment in the third quarter and the first nine months of fiscal year 2006 asa result of an increase in the number of total Xbox consoles and higher Xbox 360 unit costs. This increase was partially offset by a reduction in product support and consulting services costs. Research and Development Research anddevelopment expenses include payroll, employee benefits, stock-based compensation expense, and other headcount-related costs associated with product development. Research and development expenses also include third-party development and programmingcosts, localization costs incurred to translate software for international markets, and the amortization of purchased software code and services content. Research and development costs increased during the three months and nine months endedMarch 31, 2006 primarily due to increased product development costs associated with new and upcoming products such as Windows Vista, MSN adCenter, the Microsoft Office 2007 system, and corporate research activities. Headcount-related costsincreased 28 Table of Contents 3% and 2%, respectively, during the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006 reflecting both an increase in salaries and benefits for existingheadcount and a 15% increase in headcount partially offset by a decrease in stock-based compensation expense. Sales and Marketing Sales and marketingexpenses include payroll, employee benefits, stock-based compensation expense and other headcount-related costs associated with sales and marketing personnel and advertising, promotions, trade shows, seminars, and other programs. Sales and marketingexpenses increased during the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006 primarily due to several significant product launches during fiscal year 2006. Sales and marketing expenses also grew due to increased partner and reseller marketingcosts. Headcount-related costs increased 15% and 12%, respectively, during the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006 reflecting both an increase in salaries and benefits for existing headcount and a 21% increase in headcount partiallyoffset by a decrease in stock-based compensation expense. General and Administrative General andadministrative costs include payroll, employee benefits, stock-based compensation expense and other headcount-related costs associated with finance, legal, facilities, certain human resources, other administrative headcount, and legal and otheradministrative fees. General and administrative costs decreased primarily reflecting a decrease of legal settlements and legal contingencies charges. Legal charges decreased $438 million and $612 million, respectively, during the three and ninemonths ended March 31, 2006. In the third quarter of fiscal year 2006, we incurred $397 million in legal charges related primarily to antitrust and unfair competition consumer class actions, intellectual property claims, and an extensionpayment to Sun Microsystems, Inc. under our existing Limited Patent Covenant and Standstill Agreement, as compared to $835 million in legal charges in the prior year related primarily to settlements with Gateway, Inc. and Burst.com, an extensionpayment to Sun Microsystems, and $550 million in charges related to antitrust and other matters. We incurred $913 million in legal charges primarily related to our settlement with RealNetworks, Inc. as well as other intellectual property andantitrust matters during the nine months ended March 31, 2006, as compared to approximately $1.5 billion of legal charges in the prior year primarily related to settlements with Novell, Inc. and Gateway and other antitrustmatters. Headcount-related costs increased 7% and 6%, respectively, during the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006 reflecting both an increase in salaries and benefits for existing headcount and a 17% increase in headcount partiallyoffset by a decrease in stock-based compensation expense. 29 Table of Contents INVESTMENT INCOME, INCOME TAXES, AND OTHER Investment Income and Other The components of investment income and other are as follows: For the three and ninemonths ended March 31, 2006 dividends and interest income increased due to higher interest rates received on our fixed income investments. For the nine months ended March 31, 2006 the dividends and interest income increase was partiallyoffset by a decline in the average balance of dividend and interest-bearing investments as a result of the $32.64 billion special dividend paid on December 2, 2004 and stock repurchases. For the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006, net recognized gainson investments were comprised of net gains on sales of equity investments, net losses on sales of fixed income investments and other-than-temporary impairments on both equity and fixed income investments. Net recognized gains decreased for boththe three and nine months ended March 31, 2006 primarily due to increased losses on sales of fixed income investments. This was partially offset by a decrease in other-than-temporary impairments in the three-month period and an increase in netgains on equity investments in the nine-month period. For the three and nine months ended March 31, 2006, other-than-temporary impairments were $42 million and $91 million, respectively, as compared to $93 million and $132 million,respectively, for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2005. Investments are considered to be impaired when a decline in fair value is judged to be other than temporary. We use derivative instruments to manage exposures to interest rates, equity prices, and foreign currency markets and tofacilitate portfolio diversification. Net gains/(losses) on derivatives are as follows: During the threemonths ended March 31, 2006, we experienced losses on derivatives as compared to gains in the comparable period in the prior year primarily reflecting net losses in time value on foreign exchange contracts used to hedge anticipated foreigncurrency revenues and lower net gains on commodity positions. 30 Table of Contents During the nine months ended March 31, 2006, we experienced net gains related to equity derivativesas compared to net losses in the prior year, primarily reflecting net gains on non-designated derivatives used to economically hedge against declines in equity prices, partly offset by an increase in losses on foreign exchange contracts used tohedge anticipated foreign currency revenues. The gains andlosses arising from non-designated derivatives are economically offset by unrealized losses and gains, respectively, in the underlying equity securities which are recorded as a component of other comprehensive income. Commodity derivatives are heldfor the purpose of portfolio diversification. Net losses related to foreign currency contracts relate primarily to changes in time value of options used to hedge anticipated foreign currency revenues. Additionally, net gains and losses on foreignexchange contracts include the changes in the fair value of derivatives used as economic hedges. These gains and losses are partially offset economically by unrealized losses and gains, respectively, in the underlying assets which are included inother comprehensive income. In the second quarter of fiscalyear 2006, Microsoft and NBC Universal, Inc. ( NBC ) entered into an agreement that restructured their joint venture relationships for MSNBC Cable L.L.C. ( CJV ) and MSNBC Interactive News, L.L.C. ( IJV ). As a result,Microsoft divested 32% of CJV for $331 million and NBC acquired the right, exercisable in the following two years, to buy the remaining 18% interest. In addition, Microsoft and NBC modified their agreements to grant to IJV a U.S. content license andto remove the exclusivity obligation on both NBC and Microsoft for local and non-U.S. news content. As part of the MSNBC restructuring agreements, Microsoft paid a fee of $200 million to effectively terminate IJV s prior content licenseagreement and Microsoft prepaid the remaining $14 million license fee to NBC. Microsoft s sale of its 32% investment in CJV resulted in a recognized gain of $248 million. Microsoft also recognized a loss as a result of the effectivetermination of IJV s license agreement of $200 million. For the nine months ended March 31, 2006 income from equity investees and other includes a net gain of $48 million related to the restructuring of CJV and IJV. Income Taxes Our effective tax rate for the three and nine months ended March 31,2006 was 31% and 30%, respectively. We expect to have an effective tax rate of 31% for the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2006. Our effective tax rate for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2005 was 33%. The decline in the tax ratereflected an increase in earnings taxed at lower rates in foreign jurisdictions and by $108 million of benefits from state audit settlements. FINANCIAL CONDITION Cash and equivalents and short-term investments totaled $34.82 billion as of March 31, 2006, compared to $37.75 billion as of June 30, 2005.Equity and other investments were $8.89 billion as of March 31, 2006, compared to $11.00 billion as of June 30, 2005. The investment portfolio consists primarily of fixed-income securities, diversified among industries and individualissuers. Our investments are generally liquid and investment grade. The portfolio is invested predominantly in U.S.-dollar-denominated securities, but also includes foreign currency positions in order to diversify financial risk. The portfolio isprimarily invested in short-term securities to facilitate rapid deployment for immediate cash needs. As a result of the special dividend paid in the second quarter of fiscal year 2005 and shares repurchased, our retained deficit, includingaccumulated other comprehensive income, was $17.81 billion at March 31, 2006. Our retained deficit is not expected to impact our future ability to operate or pay dividends given our continuing profitability and strong cash and financialposition. Unearned Revenue Unearned revenue from volume licensing programs represents customerbillings, paid either upfront or annually at the beginning of each billing coverage period, that are accounted for as subscriptions with revenue 31 Table of Contents recognized ratably over the billing coverage period. For certain other licensing arrangements revenue attributable to undelivered elements, including freepost-delivery telephone support and the right to receive unspecified upgrades/enhancements of Microsoft Internet Explorer on a when-and-if-available basis, is based on the sales price of those elements when sold separately and is recognized ratablyon a straight-line basis over the life cycle of the related product. Other unearned revenue includes Services, TV Platform, Microsoft Business Solutions, and advertising and subscription services in which we have been paid upfront and earn therevenue when we provide the service or software or otherwise meet the revenue recognition criteria. Unearned revenue as of March 31, 2006 decreased $266 million from June 30, 2005, reflecting recognition of unearned revenue from multi-yearlicensing that outpaced additions by $257 million and a $9 million decrease in revenue deferred for undelivered elements. Unearned revenue as of March 31, 2006 increased $63 million from December 31, 2005, reflecting recognition ofunearned revenue from multi-year licensing that outpaced additions by $7 million, a $15 million decrease in revenue deferred for undelivered elements, and an $85 million increase primarily in unearned revenue for Services and subscription services. The following table outlines the expected recognition of $8.9billion of unearned revenue as of March 31, 2006: SeeNote 4 Unearned Revenue of the Notes to Financial Statements (Item 1) Cash Flows Cashflow from operations for the nine months ended March 31, 2006 decreased $1.51 billion from the first nine months of fiscal year 2005 to $11.12 billion, reflecting an increase in Xbox 360 inventory, payment of current liabilities, and otherchanges in working capital. Cash used for financing was $15.88 billion in the first nine months of fiscal year 2006, a decrease of $21.49 billion from the corresponding period in fiscal year 2005. The decrease is primarily due to the $32.63 billiondecrease in dividends paid due to the special dividend in the second quarter of fiscal year 2005, partially offset by an $11.48 billion increase in common stock repurchases. Included in repurchases are approximately 561 million sharesrepurchased for $15.12 billion during the nine months ended March 31, 2006 as compared to 141.5 million shares repurchased for $3.70 billion during the nine months ended March 31, 2005. Cash from investing was $4.26 billion in thefirst nine months of fiscal year 2006, a decrease of $9.90 billion from the first nine months of fiscal year 2005, reflecting a $10.64 billion decrease in net cash from combined investment purchases, sales, and maturities in preparation for thespecial dividend paid in the second quarter of the prior year partially offset by a cash inflow of $1.34 billion from securities lending in the third quarter of fiscal year 2006. We have no material long-term debt. Stockholders equity at March 31, 2006 was $42.04 billion. We will continue toinvest in sales, marketing, product support infrastructure, and existing and advanced areas of technology. Additions to property and equipment will continue, including new facilities and computer systems for research and development, sales andmarketing, support, and administrative staff. We have operating leases for most U.S. and international sales and support offices. We have issued residual value guarantees in connection 32 Table of Contents with various operating leases. These guarantees provide that if we do not purchase the leased property from the lessor at the end of the lease term, then weare liable to the lessor for an amount equal to the shortage (if any) between the proceeds from the sale of the property and an agreed value. As of March 31, 2006, the maximum amount of the residual value guarantees was approximately $271million. We believe that proceeds from the sale of properties under operating leases would exceed the payment obligation and therefore no liability currently exists. We have not engaged in any related party transactions or arrangements withunconsolidated entities or other persons that are reasonably likely to materially affect liquidity or the availability of requirements for capital resources. On March 27, 2006, our Board of Directors declared a regular quarterly dividend of $0.09 per share. The dividend is payable on June 8, 2006 toshareholders of record at the close of business on May 17, 2006. The ex-dividend date is May 15, 2006. On December 14, 2005, our Board of Directors declared a regular quarterly dividend of $0.09 per share. The dividend was paid onMarch 9, 2006 to shareholders of record at the close of business on February 17, 2006. The ex-dividend date was February 15, 2006. On September 23, 2005, our Board of Directors declared a regular quarterly dividend of $0.08 pershare. The dividend was paid on December 8, 2005, to shareholders of record at the close of business on November 17, 2005. The ex-dividend date was November 15, 2005. On October 26, 2005, our Board of Directors approved a modification to the July 20, 2004 share repurchase plan.The original repurchase plan called for up to $30 billion of Microsoft common stock to be repurchased over the succeeding four years. Under the revised plan, we expect to complete the $30 billion approved repurchase amount no later thanDecember 2006. As of March 31, 2006, approximately $6.4 billion remained of the $30 billion approved repurchase amount. The specific timing and amount of repurchases will vary based upon market conditions, securities laws limitations,and other factors. The repurchase program may be suspended or discontinued at any time without notice. We believe existing cash and equivalents and short-term investments, together with funds generated from operations, should be sufficient to meet operatingrequirements, regular quarterly dividends, and planned share repurchases. Our philosophy regarding the maintenance of a balance sheet with a large component of cash and short-term investments, as well as equity and other investments, reflects ourviews on potential future capital requirements relating to research and development, creation and expansion of sales distribution channels, investments and acquisitions, share dilution management, legal risks, and challenges to our business model.We regularly assess our investment management approach in view of our current and potential future needs. Off-balance sheet arrangements We provide indemnifications of varying scope and amount to certain customers against claims of intellectual property infringement made by third partiesarising from the use of our products. We evaluate estimated losses for such indemnifications under SFAS No. 5, Accounting for Contingencies , as interpreted by FASB Interpretation No. 45, Guarantor s Accounting and DisclosureRequirements for Guarantees, Including Indirect Guarantees of Indebtedness of Others . We consider factors such as the degree of probability of an unfavorable outcome and the ability to make a reasonable estimate of the amount of loss. To date,we have not encountered material costs as a result of such obligations and have not accrued any material liabilities related to such indemnifications in our financial statements. RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING STANDARDS Prior to July 1, 2005, we accounted for stock-based compensation in accordance with SFAS No. 123, Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation, as amended by SFAS No. 148, Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation Transition and Disclosure. Under the fair value recognition provisions of SFAS No. 123, stock-based compensation expense for all stock-based awards wasmeasured at the grant date based on the value of the award and was recognized as expense over the service period for awards that were expected to vest. 33 Table of Contents Effective July 1, 2005, we adopted SFAS No. 123(R), Share-Based Payment, using themodified prospective application transition method. Because the fair value recognition provisions of SFAS No. 123 and SFAS No. 123(R) were materially consistent under our equity plans, the adoption of SFAS No. 123(R) did not have asignificant impact on our financial position or our results of operations. Prior to our adoption of SFAS No. 123(R), benefits of tax deductions in excess of recognized compensation costs were reported as operating cash flows. SFASNo. 123(R) requires excess tax benefits be reported as a financing cash inflow rather than as a reduction of taxes paid. As of March 31, 2006, there was $1.7 billion and $417 million of total unrecognized compensation costs related to SAsand SPSAs, respectively. These costs are expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of 3.6 and 2.4 years, respectively. As of March 31, 2006, there was $559 million of total unrecognized compensation costs related to stockoptions. These costs are expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of one year. In November 2005, the FASB issued Staff Position ( FSP ) FAS123(R)-3, Transition Election to Accounting for the Tax Effects of Share-Based Payment Awards. This FSP requires an entity to follow eitherthe transition guidance for the additional-paid-in-capital pool as prescribed in SFAS No. 123(R), Share-Based Payment , or the alternative transition method as described in the FSP. An entity that adopts SFAS No. 123(R) using themodified prospective application may make a one-time election to adopt the transition method described in this FSP. An entity may take up to one year from the later of its initial adoption of SFAS No. 123(R) or the effective date of this FSP toevaluate its available transition alternatives and make its one-time election. This FSP became effective in November 2005. We continue to evaluate the impact that the adoption of this FSP could have on our financial statements. In November 2005, the FASB issued FSP FAS115-1/124-1, The Meaning ofOther-Than-Temporary Impairment and Its Application to Certain Investments , which addresses the determination as to when an investment is considered impaired, whether that impairment is other than temporary, and the measurement of an impairmentloss. This FSP also includes accounting considerations subsequent to the recognition of an other-than-temporary impairment and requires certain disclosures about unrealized losses that have not been recognized as other-than-temporaryimpairments. The guidance in this FSP amends FASB Statements No. 115, Accounting for Certain Investments in Debt and Equity Securities , and No. 124, Accounting for Certain Investments Held by Not-for-ProfitOrganizations , and APB Opinion No. 18, The Equity Method of Accounting for Investments in Common Stock . We adopted this FSP during the three months ended March 31, 2006 and it did not have a material impact on our financialstatements. APPLICATION OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES Our financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordancewith U.S. GAAP. Preparing financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are affected by management sapplication of accounting policies. Critical accounting policies for us include revenue recognition, impairment of investment securities, impairment of goodwill, accounting for research and development costs, accounting for legal contingencies,accounting for income taxes, and accounting for stock-based compensation. We account for the licensing of software in accordance with American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Statement of Position ( SOP ) 97-2, Software Revenue Recognition . The application of SOP97-2 requires judgment, including whether a software arrangement includes multiple elements, and if so, whether vendor-specific objective evidence ( VSOE ) of fair value exists for those elements. Customers receive certain elements of ourproducts over a period of time. These elements include free post-delivery telephone support and the right to receive unspecified upgrades/enhancements of Microsoft Internet Explorer on a when-and-if-available basis, the fair value of which isrecognized over the product s estimated life cycle. Changes to the elements in a software arrangement, the ability to identify VSOE for those elements, the fair value of the respective elements and changes to a product s estimated lifecycle could materially impact the 34 Table of Contents amount of earned and unearned revenue. Judgment is also required to assess whether future releases of certain software represent new products or upgrades andenhancements to existing products. SFAS No. 115, Accounting for Certain Investments in Debt and Equity Securities , and Staff Accounting Bulletin 59, Accounting for Noncurrent Marketable Equity Securities , provide guidance on determining when an investment is other-than-temporarilyimpaired. Investments are reviewed quarterly for indicators of other-than- temporary impairment. This determination requires significant judgment. In making this judgment, we employ a systematic methodology quarterly that considers availablequantitative and qualitative evidence in evaluating potential impairment of our investments. If the cost of an investment exceeds its fair value, we evaluate, among other factors, general market conditions, the duration and extent to which the fairvalue is less than cost, and our intent and ability to hold the investment. We also consider specific adverse conditions related to the financial health of and business outlook for the investee, including industry and sector performance, changes intechnology, operational and financing cash flow factors, and rating agency actions. Once a decline in fair value is determined to be other-than-temporary, an impairment charge is recorded and a new cost basis in the investment is established. Ifmarket, industry and/or investee conditions deteriorate, we may incur future impairments. SFAS No. 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets , requires that goodwill be tested for impairment at the reporting unit level (operating segment or one level below an operating segment) on an annualbasis (July 1 for us) and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value. These events or circumstances could include a significantchange in the business climate, legal factors, operating performance indicators, competition, or sale or disposition of a significant portion of a reporting unit. Application of the goodwill impairment test requires judgment, including theidentification of reporting units, assignment of assets and liabilities to reporting units, assignment of goodwill to reporting units, and determination of the fair value of each reporting unit. The fair value of each reporting unit is estimatedusing a discounted cash flow methodology. This requires significant judgments including estimation of future cash flows, which is dependent on internal forecasts, estimation of the long-term rate of growth for our businesses, the useful life overwhich cash flows will occur, and determination of our weighted average cost of capital. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value and/or goodwill impairment for each reporting unit. We account for research and development costs in accordancewith several accounting pronouncements, including SFAS No. 2, Accounting for Research and Development Costs , and SFAS No. 86, Accounting for the Costs of Computer Software to be Sold, Leased, or Otherwise Marketed . SFASNo. 86 specifies that costs incurred internally in researching and developing a computer software product should be charged to expense until technological feasibility has been established for the product. Once technological feasibility isestablished, all software costs should be capitalized until the product is available for general release to customers. Judgment is required in determining when technological feasibility of a product is established. We have determined thattechnological feasibility for our software products is reached shortly before the products are released to manufacturing. Costs incurred after technological feasibility is established are not material, and accordingly, we expense all research anddevelopment costs when incurred. The outcomes of legalproceedings and claims brought against us are subject to significant uncertainty. SFAS No. 5 requires that an estimated loss from a loss contingency such as a legal proceeding or claim should be accrued by a charge to income if it is probablethat an asset has been impaired or a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. Disclosure of a contingency is required if there is at least a reasonable possibility that a loss has been incurred. Indetermining whether a loss should be accrued we evaluate, among other factors, the degree of probability of an unfavorable outcome and the ability to make a reasonable estimate of the amount of loss. Changes in these factors could materially impactour financial position or our results of operations. SFASNo. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes , establishes financial accounting and reporting standards for the effect of income taxes. The objectives of accounting for income taxes are to recognize the amount of taxes 35 Table of Contents payable or refundable for the current year and deferred tax liabilities and assets for the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in anentity s financial statements or tax returns. Judgment is required in assessing the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns. Variations in the actual outcome of these future taxconsequences could materially impact our financial position, our results of operations, or our cash flows. We account for stock-based compensation in accordance with SFAS No. 123(R). Under the fair value recognition provisions of this statement,share-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the value of the award and is recognized as expense over the vesting period. Determining the fair value of share-based awards at the grant date requires judgment, includingestimating expected dividends. In addition, judgment is also required in estimating the amount of share-based awards that are expected to be forfeited. If actual results differ significantly from these estimates, stock-based compensation expense andour results of operations could be materially impacted. RISK FACTORS Our operations and financial results are subject tovarious risks and uncertainties, including those described below, that could adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of operations and trading price of our common stock. Please refer also to our annual report on Form 10-K forfiscal year 2005 for additional information concerning these and other uncertainties that could negatively impact the Company. Challenges to our business model may reduce our revenues and operating margins. Our business model has been based upon customers agreeing to pay afee to license software developed and distributed by us. Under this commercial software model, software developers bear the costs of converting original ideas into software products through investments in research and development, offsetting thesecosts with the revenue received from the distribution of their products. We believe the commercial software model has had substantial benefits for users of software, allowing them to rely on our expertise and the expertise of other softwaredevelopers that have powerful incentives to develop innovative software that is useful, reliable, and compatible with other software and hardware. In recent years, a non-commercial software model has evolved that presents a growing challenge to thecommercial software model. Under the non-commercial software model, open source software produced by loosely associated groups of unpaid programmers and made available for license to end users without charge is distributed by firms at nominal costthat earn revenue on complementary services and products, without having to bear the full costs of research and development for the open source software. The most notable example of open source software is the Linux operating system. While webelieve our products provide customers with significant advantages in security and productivity, and generally have a lower total cost of ownership than open source software, the popularization of the non-commercial software model continues to posea significant challenge to our business model, including recent efforts by proponents of open source software to convince governments worldwide to mandate the use of open source software in their purchase and deployment of software products. To theextent open source software gains increasing market acceptance, sales of our products may decline, we may have to reduce the prices we charge for our products, and revenue and operating margins may consequently decline. Another development is the software-as-a-service business model, by whichcompanies provide applications, data, and related services over the Internet. Providers use primarily advertising or subscription-based revenue models. Recent advances in computing and communications technologies have made this model viable andenabled the rapid growth of some of our competitors. We are devoting significant resources toward developing our own software-as-a-service strategies. It is uncertain whether these strategies will prove successful. We face intense competition. We continue to experience intensecompetition across all markets for our products and services. Our competitors range in size from Fortune 100 companies to small, single-product businesses that are highly specialized and open source community-based projects. While we believe thebreadth 36 Table of Contents of our businesses and product portfolio offers benefits to our customers that are a competitive advantage, our competitors that are focused on a narrowerproduct line may be more effective in devoting technical, marketing, and financial resources to compete with us. In addition, barriers to entry in our businesses generally are low. The Internet as a distribution channel and the non-commercialsoftware model described above have reduced barriers to entry even further. Non-commercial software vendors are devoting considerable efforts to developing software that mimics the features and functionality of our products. In response tocompetitive factors, we are developing versions of our products with basic functionality that are sold at lower prices than the standard versions. These competitive pressures may result in decreased sales volumes, price reductions, and/or increasedoperating costs, such as for marketing and sales incentives, resulting in lower revenue, gross margins and operating income. We may not be able to protect our intellectual property rights against piracy, infringement of our patents by third parties, or declining legalprotection for intellectual property. We defend our intellectual property rights and combat unlicensed copying and use of software and intellectual property rights through a variety of techniques. Preventing unauthorized use or infringementof our rights is difficult. Piracy of our products represents a loss of revenue to us. While this adversely affects U.S. revenue, the impact on revenue from outside the United States is more significant, particularly in countries where laws are lessprotective of intellectual property rights. Similarly, the absence of harmonized patent laws makes it more difficult to ensure consistent respect for patent rights. Moreover, future legal changes could make this even more challenging. Throughout theworld, we actively educate consumers about the benefits of licensing genuine products and obtaining indemnification benefits for intellectual property risks, and we educate lawmakers about the advantages of a business climate where intellectualproperty rights are protected. However, continued educational and enforcement efforts may not affect revenue positively, and revenue could be adversely affected by reductions in the legal protection for intellectual property rights for softwaredevelopers or by compliance with additional legal obligations impacting the intellectual property rights of software developers. Third parties may claim we infringe their intellectual property rights. From time to time we receive notices from others claiming we infringetheir intellectual property rights. The number of these claims may grow. Responding to these claims may require us to enter into royalty and licensing agreements on less favorable terms, require us to stop selling or to redesign affected products,or to pay damages or to satisfy indemnification commitments with our customers including contractual provisions under various license arrangements. If we are required to enter into such agreements or take such actions, our operating margins maydecline as a result. We have made and expect to continue making significant expenditures to settle claims related to the use of technology and intellectual property rights as part of our strategy to manage this risk. We may not be able to protect our source code from copying if there is anunauthorized disclosure of source code. Source code, the detailed program commands for our operating systems and other software programs, is critical to our business. While we license certain portions of our source code for various softwareprograms and operating systems to a number of licensees, we take significant measures to protect the secrecy of large portions of our source code. If an unauthorized disclosure of a significant portion of our source code occurs, we could potentiallylose future trade secret protection for that source code. The loss of future trade secret protection could make it easier for third parties to compete with our products by copying functionality, which could adversely affect our revenue and operatingmargins. Unauthorized disclosure of source code could also increase certain risks described in the next paragraph. Security vulnerabilities in our products could lead to reduced revenues or to liability claims. Maintaining the security of computers andcomputer networks is an issue of critical importance for us and our customers. There are malicious hackers who develop and deploy viruses, worms, and other malicious software programs that attack our products. While this is an industry-widephenomenon that affects computers across all platforms, it affects our products in particular because hackers tend to focus their efforts on the most popular operating systems and programs and we expect them to continue to do so. We devotesignificant resources to address these critical issues. We are focusing on engineering even more secure products, enhancing security and reliability options and settings when we deliver products, and providing guidance to help our 37 Table of Contents customers make the best use of our products and services to protect against computer viruses and other attacks on their computing environment. In addition,we are working to improve the deployment of software updates to address security vulnerabilities discovered after our products are released. We are also investing in mitigation technologies that help to secure customers from attacks even when suchsoftware updates are not deployed. We are also advising customers on how to help protect themselves from security threats through the use of our online automated security tools, our published security guidance, and the deployment of securitysoftware such as firewalls, anti-virus, and other security software. The cost of these steps could adversely affect our operating margins. Despite these efforts, actual or perceived security vulnerabilities in our products could lead some customersto seek to return products, to reduce or delay future purchases, or to use competing products. Customers may also increase their expenditures on protecting their existing computer systems from attack, which could delay adoption of new technologies.Any of these actions by customers could adversely affect our revenue. We devote significant resources to improving the security design and engineering of our software. Nevertheless, actual or perceived vulnerabilities may lead to claims against us.While our license agreements typically contain provisions that eliminate or limit our exposure to such liability claims, there is no assurance these provisions will be held effective under applicable laws and judicial decisions. We are subject to government litigation and regulatory activity thataffects how we design and market our products. As a leading global software maker we receive scrutiny from government agencies under U.S. and foreign competition laws. Some jurisdictions also provide private rights of action for competitorsor consumers based on alleged anti-competitive conduct. Lawsuits brought by the U.S. Department of Justice, 18 states, and the District of Columbia in two separate actions were resolved through a Consent Decree that took effect in November 2001 anda Final Judgment entered in November 2002. These proceedings imposed regulatory constraints on our Windows operating system businesses, including limits on certain contracting practices, required disclosure of certain software program interfaces,limits on Microsoft s ability to ensure the visibility of certain Windows features in new PCs, and required licensing of certain communications protocols. While we believe we currently are in full compliance with the Decree and Judgment, if wefail to comply with them in the future additional restrictions could be imposed on us that would adversely affect our business. In March 2004, the European Commission determined that we must create new versions of Windows that do not include certain multimedia technologies, many ofwhich are required for certain Web sites, software applications and other aspects of Windows to function properly, and we must provide our competitors with specifications for how to implement certain communications protocols supported in Windows.Microsoft has appealed both determinations to European courts. As a result of the Commission decision, we have incurred and will continue to incur duplicative development costs (absent a court decision to reverse or limit this aspect of the ruling).The availability of these alternative versions of Windows in the market also may cause confusion that harms our reputation, including among consumers and with third-party software and Web site developers who rely on the functionality removed fromthese alternative versions. The Commission ruling obligates Microsoft to make available specifications for certain Windows communications protocol technologies on licensing terms that are closely regulated by the Commission. The availability ofthese licenses may enable competitors to develop software products that better mimic the functionality of Microsoft s own products which could result in a reduction in sales of our products. Unless reversed or limited on appeal, the ruling ofthe European Commission may be cited as a precedent in other proceedings that seek to limit our ability to continue to improve Windows by adding new functionality in response to consumer demand. The ruling also illustrates a risk that competitionauthorities in Europe or elsewhere may authorize competitors to distribute implementations of Microsoft communications protocols in source code form without proper contractual provisions to protect our intellectual property. In December 2005 theCommission issued a Statement of Objections that preliminarily concluded we were not in full compliance with the 2004 decree. The Statement of Objections could result in further monetary fines of up to 2 million per day fromDecember 15, 2005 and other obligations. We are disputing that finding. In December 2005, the Korean Fair Trade Commission ( KFTC ) completed an investigation of whether including streaming media technology or instant messenger technology in Windows, or including Windows MediaServices as an optional component of Windows Server, violates the Korean Fair Trade Law. In December 38 Table of Contents 2005 the KFTC ruled that we had violated the law and issued a remedial order requiring us to offer two versions of Windows PC operating systems, one withWindows Media Player and Instant Messenger removed and another with those functionalities but also including opportunities for OEMs to install competing media player and instant messenger programs. If upheld over Microsoft s appeal, theseremedies could adversely affect the utility and competitive position of Windows PC operating systems in the Korean market. We believe our integrated approach to delivery of product innovation benefits consumers and business. Current or future government regulatory efforts mayhinder our ability to provide these benefits reducing the attractiveness of our products and the revenues that come from them. Moreover, there always remains the risk of new legal action, either by governments or private claimants including withrespect to products that haven t been scrutinized in the past. Our online services are subject to government regulation of the Internet domestically and internationally in areas such as user privacy, data protection, and online content. The application of these laws and regulations to our business isoften unclear and sometimes may conflict. Compliance with these regulations may involve significant costs or require changes in business practices that result in reduced revenue. Noncompliance could result in penalties being imposed on us or ordersthat we cease conducting the noncompliant activity. Ourbusiness depends largely on our ability to attract and retain talented employees. Our business is based on successfully attracting and retaining talented employees. The market for highly skilled workers in our industry is extremelycompetitive. We are limited in our ability to recruit internationally by restrictive domestic immigration laws. If we are less successful in our recruiting efforts, or if we are unable to retain key employees, our ability to develop and deliversuccessful products and services may be adversely affected. Delays in product development schedules may adversely affect our revenues. The development of software products is a complex and time-consuming process. New products and enhancements to existing products can require longdevelopment and testing periods. Significant delays in new product releases or significant problems in creating new products, could adversely affect our revenue. We make significant investments in new products and services that may not be profitable. We have made and willcontinue to make significant investments in research, development, and marketing for new products, services, and technologies, including Windows Vista, Microsoft Office 2007 system, MSN Search, Windows Server and Windows Live. Investments in newtechnology are inherently speculative. Commercial success depends on many factors including innovativeness, developer support, and effective distribution and marketing. Significant revenue from new product and service investments may not be achievedfor a number of years, if at all. Moreover, new products and services may not be profitable, and even if they are profitable, operating margins for new products and businesses may not be as high as the margins we have experienced historically. Declines in demand for software could occur. Ifoverall market demand for PCs, servers, and other computing devices declines significantly, or consumer or corporate spending for such products declines, our revenue will be adversely affected. In addition, our revenue would be unfavorably impactedif customers reduce their purchases of new software products or upgrades to existing products because new product offerings are not perceived as providing significant new functionality or other value to prospective purchasers. We are makingsignificant investments in Windows Vista and the Microsoft Office 2007 system. If these products are not perceived as offering significant new functionality or value to prospective purchasers, our revenue and operating margins could be adverselyaffected. We have claims and lawsuits against us that mayresult in adverse outcomes. We are subject to a variety of claims and lawsuits. Adverse outcomes in some or all of the claims pending against us may result in significant monetary damages or injunctive relief against us that could adverselyaffect our ability to conduct our business. While management currently believes that resolving all of these matters, individually or in the aggregate, will not have a material adverse impact on our financial position or results of operations, thelitigation 39 Table of Contents and other claims are subject to inherent uncertainties and management s view of these matters may change in the future. There exists the possibility ofa material adverse impact on our financial position and the results of operations for the period in which the effect of an unfavorable final outcome becomes probable and reasonably estimable. We may have additional tax liabilities. We are subject to incometaxes in both the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in determining our worldwide provision for income taxes. In the ordinary course of our business, there are many transactions and calculations wherethe ultimate tax determination is uncertain. We are regularly under audit by tax authorities. Although we believe our tax estimates are reasonable, the final determination of tax audits and any related litigation could be materially different thanthat which is reflected in historical income tax provisions and accruals. Based on the results of an audit or litigation, a material effect on our income tax provision, net income or cash flows in the period or periods for which that determinationis made could result. We may be at risk of havinginsufficient supplies of certain Xbox 360 components or console inventory. Some components of the Xbox 360 are obtained from a single supplier and others may be subject to an industry-wide supply shortage. If a component delivery from asole-source supplier is delayed or becomes unavailable or industry shortages occur, we may be unable to obtain replacement supplies on a timely basis, resulting in reduced console and game sales. Components are ordered based on forecasted consoledemand so we may experience component shortages for the Xbox 360. Similarly, if our demand forecasts for the existing Xbox console are inaccurate and exceed actual demand, we may have excess console inventory that may require us to record charges tocost of revenue for the excess inventory. Xbox 360 consoles will be assembled in Asia; disruptions in the supply chain may result in console shortages that would affect our revenues and operating margins. If our goodwill or amortizable intangible assets become impaired we may berequired to record a significant charge to earnings. Under generally accepted accounting principles, we review our amortizable intangible assets for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not berecoverable. Goodwill is required to be tested for impairment at least annually. Factors that may be considered a change in circumstances indicating that the carrying value of our goodwill or amortizable intangible assets may not be recoverableinclude a decline in stock price and market capitalization, reduced future cash flow estimates, and slower growth rates in our industry. We may be required to record a significant charge to earnings in our financial statements during the period inwhich any impairment of our goodwill or amortizable intangible assets is determined, resulting in an impact on our results of operations. Changes in accounting may affect our reported earnings and operating income. Generally accepted accounting principles and accompanyingaccounting pronouncements, implementation guidelines, and interpretations for many aspects of our business, such as revenue recognition for software, accounting for investments, and treatment of goodwill or amortizable intangible assets, are highlycomplex and involve subjective judgments. Changes in these rules or their interpretation or changes in our products or business could significantly change our reported earnings and operating income and could add significant volatility to thosemeasures, without a comparable underlying change in cash flow from operations. See Note 1 Basis of Presentation and Consolidation of the Notes to Financial Statements (Item 1) and Management s Discussion and Analysis of FinancialCondition and Results of Operations Application of Critical Accounting Policies (Item 2) of this report. We operate a global business that exposes us to additional risks. We operate in over 100 countries and a significant part of our revenue comesfrom international sales. Pressure to make our pricing structure uniform might require that we reduce the sales price of our software in the United States and other countries. Operations outside of the United States may be affected by changes intrade protection laws, policies and measures, and other regulatory requirements affecting trade and investment; unexpected changes in regulatory requirements for software; social, political, labor or economic conditions in a specific country orregion; and difficulties in staffing 40 Table of Contents and managing foreign operations. While we hedge a portion of our international currency exposure, significant fluctuations in exchange rates between the U.S.dollar and foreign currencies may adversely affect our net revenues. General economic and geo-political risks may affect our revenue and profitability. Softness in corporate information technology spending or other changes in general economic conditions that affect demand for computer hardware orsoftware could adversely affect our revenue. Abrupt political change, terrorist activity, and armed conflict pose a risk of general economic disruption in affected countries or generally and could require changes in our operations and securityarrangements, thus increasing our operating costs. These conditions may lend additional uncertainty to the timing and budget for technology investment decisions by our customers. Catastrophic events may disrupt our business. We are a highly automated business and a disruption or failure ofour systems in the event of a major earthquake, cyber-attack, terrorist attack, or other catastrophic event could cause delays in completing sales and providing services. Our corporate headquarters, a significant portion of our research anddevelopment activities, and certain other critical business operations are located in the Seattle, Washington area, and we have other business operations in the Silicon Valley area of California, both of which are near major earthquake faults. Acatastrophic event that results in the destruction or disruption of any of our critical business or information technology systems could severely affect our ability to conduct normal business operations and, as a result, our future operating resultscould be adversely affected. Acquisitions and jointventures may have an adverse effect on our business. We expect to continue making acquisitions or entering into joint ventures as part of our long-term business strategy. These transactions involve significant challenges and risks includingthat the transaction does not advance our business strategy, that we don t realize a satisfactory return on the investment we make, or that we may experience difficulty in the integration of new employees, business systems, and technology, ordiversion of management s attention from our other businesses. These factors could adversely affect our operating results or financial condition. We have limited insurance. We maintain third party insurance coverage against various liability risks and risks of property loss. Because ofthe unavailability or high cost of conventional insurance arrangements, we have entered into captive insurance arrangements for the purpose of protecting against possible catastrophic and other risks not covered by traditional insurance markets. Asof March 31, 2006, the face value of captive insurance arrangements was $2.0 billion. Actual value at any particular time will vary due to deductibles, exclusions, other restrictions, and claims. While we believe these arrangements are aneffective way to insure against liability and property damage risks, the potential liabilities associated with the risks discussed in this report or other events could exceed the coverage provided by such arrangements. Other risks that may affect our business. Other factors that mayaffect our performance may include: °Item 3. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk We are exposed to foreign currency, interest rate, fixed income, equity, and commodity price risks. A portion of these risks is hedged, but fluctuationscould impact our results of operations and financial position. We hedge a portion of anticipated revenue and accounts receivable exposure to foreign currency fluctuations, primarily with option contracts. We monitor our foreign currency exposuresdaily to maximize the overall effectiveness of our foreign currency hedge positions. Principal currencies hedged include the euro, Japanese yen, British pound, and Canadian dollar. Fixed income securities are subject to interest rate risk. Theportfolio is diversified and structured to minimize credit risk. Securities held in our equity and other investments portfolio 41 Table of Contents are subject to price risk, and are generally not hedged. However, we use options to hedge our price risk on certain equity securities that are held primarilyfor strategic purposes. We use a value-at-risk( VaR ) model to estimate and quantify our market risks. VaR is the expected loss, for a given confidence level, in fair value of our portfolio due to adverse market movements over a defined time horizon. The VaR model is not intended torepresent actual losses in fair value, but is used as a risk estimation and management tool. The model used for currencies, equities, and commodities is geometric Brownian motion, which allows incorporation of optionality with regard to these riskexposures. For interest rate risk, exposures such as key rate durations and spread durations are used in calculations that reflect the principle that fixed income security prices revert to maturity value over time. VaR is calculated by computing the exposures of each holding s marketvalue to a range of over 1,000 equity, fixed income, foreign exchange, and commodity risk factors. The exposures are then used to compute the parameters of a distribution of potential changes in the total market value of all holdings, taking intoaccount the weighted historical volatilities of the different rates and prices and the weighted historical correlations among the different rates and prices. The VaR is then calculated as the total loss that will not be exceeded at the 97.5percentile confidence level or, alternatively stated, the losses could exceed the VaR in 25 out of 1,000 cases. Several risk factors are not captured in the model, including liquidity risk, operational risk, credit risk, and legal risk. Certain securities in our equity portfolio are held for strategicpurposes. We hedge the value of a portion of these securities through the use of derivative contracts such as put-call collars. In these arrangements, we hedge a security s equity price risk below the purchased put strike and forgo most or allof the benefits of the security s appreciation above the sold call strike, in exchange for the premium received for the sold call. We also hold equity securities for general investment return purposes. We have incurred material impairmentcharges related to these securities in previous periods. TheVaR amounts disclosed below are used as a risk management tool and reflect an estimate of potential reductions in fair value of our portfolio. Losses in fair value over the specified holding period can exceed the reported VaR by significant amountsand can also accumulate over a longer time horizon than the specified holding period used in the VaR analysis. VaR amounts are not necessarily reflective of potential accounting losses, including determinations of other-than-temporary losses in fairvalue in accordance with U.S. GAAP. VaR numbers are shownseparately for interest rate, currency, equity, and commodity risks. These VaR numbers include the underlying portfolio positions and related hedges. We use historical data to estimate VaR. Given the reliance on historical data, VaR is mosteffective in estimating risk exposures in markets in which there are no fundamental changes or shifts in market conditions. An inherent limitation in VaR is that the distribution of past changes in market risk factors may not produce accuratepredictions of future market risk. The following table setsforth the one-day VaR for substantially all of our positions as of and for the three months ended March 31, 2006: Total one-day VaR forthe combined risk categories is $122 million at March 31, 2006 and $195 million at June 30, 2005. The total VaR is 42% less at March 31, 2006 and 39% less at June, 30 2005 than the sum of the separate risk categories in the abovetable due to the diversification benefit of the combination of risks. 42 Table of Contents °Item 4. Controls and Procedures Under the supervision and with the participation of our management, including the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, we have evaluated the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures as required by Exchange ActRule 13a-15(b) as of the end of the period covered by this report. Based on that evaluation, the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have concluded that these disclosure controls and procedures are effective. There were no changes inour internal control over financial reporting during the quarter ended March 31, 2006 that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. 43 Table of Contents Part II. Other Information °Item 1. Legal Proceedings On February 23, 2006, the Korean Fair Trade Commission ( KFTC ) issued a formal written ruling against us in its investigation of the company under Korean competition law. The KFTC held that our integration of Windows MediaPlayer and Windows Messenger in the Windows client operating system and the integration of Windows Media Services in Windows server constituted an abuse of monopoly power and unlawful tying in violation of the Korean Fair Trade Act. Under the order,which will go into effect within 180 days, we may no longer distribute Windows in Korea as currently designed. The order requires that we develop and distribute in Korea a version of Windows XP and its successors that does not include Windows MediaPlayer or Windows Messenger functionality. Additionally, we may also distribute a second modified version of Windows that contains the removed functionality, provided that the second version includes promotional links in the user interface that willenable consumers to link to and download a select group of competing media players and instant messengers. The order also prohibits us from including Windows Media Player or Windows Messenger, or any feature with similar functionality, in anyproduct for which we have a 50% or greater market share. We have appealed the KFTC s decision to the Seoul High Court and have also sought reconsideration before the KFTC. Although we have not yet determined how the Commission s rulingwill impact our business in Korea, the announced remedies do not prevent us from distributing Windows in Korea. On December 21, 2005 the European Commission issued a Statement of Objections in its competition law investigation of us. The Commission stated itspreliminary conclusion that we were in violation of the Commission s 2004 decision by failing to produce and license technical information that was sufficiently useable or that covered all the technologies to which the decision was directed.The Statement of Objections could result in further monetary fines of up to 2 million per day from December 15, 2005 and other obligations. We opposed the Statement of Objections in a written response in February 2006. The Commissionconducted an oral hearing on the Statement of Objections and our response on March 30-31, 2006. The Commission may, but is not required to, issue a decision based on the Statement of Objections at any time thereafter. See Note 8 Contingencies of the Notes to Financial Statements (Item 1)for information regarding these and other legal proceedings in which we are involved. °Item 2. Unregistered Sales of Equity Securities and Use of Proceeds °Items 2(a) and (b) are inapplicable. (c) STOCK REPURCHASES On July 20, 2004,our Board of Directors approved a plan to buy back up to $30 billion in Microsoft common stock over the next four years. The specific timing and amount of repurchases will vary based on market 44 Table of Contents conditions, securities law limitations, and other factors. The repurchases will be made using our cash resources. On October 26, 2005, our Boardapproved a modification to the July 20, 2004 share repurchase plan. The original repurchase plan called for up to $30 billion of Microsoft common stock to be repurchased over the succeeding four years. Under the revised plan, we expect tocomplete the $30 billion approved repurchase amount no later than December 2006. During the third quarter of fiscal year 2006, we repurchased 181 million shares for $4.9 billion under the revised plan. The transactions occurred in open marketpurchases and pursuant to a trading plan under Rule 10b5-1. The repurchase program may be suspended or discontinued at any time without prior notice. °Item 6. Exhibits °Items 3, 4, and 5 are notapplicable and have been omitted. 45 Table of Contents SIGNATURE Pursuant to therequirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned thereunto duly authorized. 46