Table of Contents UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Washington, D.C. 20549 FORM 10-Q For the Quarterly Period Ended December 31, 2006 OR For the Transition Period From to Commission File Number: 0-14278 MICROSOFT CORPORATION (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) (425) 882-8080 (Registrant s telephone number, including area code) None (Former name, former address and former fiscal year, if changed since last report) Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities ExchangeAct of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past90 days. Yes No Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, or a non-accelerated filer. See definition of accelerated filer and large accelerated filer in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. Large accelerated filer Accelerated filer Non-accelerated filer Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (asdefined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). Yes No Indicate the number of shares outstanding of each of the issuer s classes of common stock, as of thelatest practicable date. Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION FORM 10-Q For the Quarter Ended December 31, 2006 INDEX Table of Contents Part I. Financial Information °Item 1. Financial Statements MICROSOFT CORPORATION INCOME STATEMENTS (In millions, except per share amounts)(Unaudited) See accompanying notes. 1 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION BALANCE SHEETS (In millions) Seeaccompanying notes. 2 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION CASH FLOWS STATEMENTS (In millions)(Unaudited) See accompanying notes. 3 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION STOCKHOLDERS EQUITY STATEMENTS (In millions)(Unaudited) See accompanying notes. 4 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Unaudited) Note 1 Basis ofPresentation and Consolidation Basis of Presentation In the opinion of management, the accompanying balance sheets and related interim statements of income, cash flows, and stockholders equity includeall adjustments, consisting only of normal recurring items, necessary for their fair presentation in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ( U.S. GAAP ). Preparing financial statementsrequires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. Examples include: estimates of loss contingencies, product life cycles, and stock-based compensation forfeiturerates; assumptions such as the elements comprising a software arrangement, including the distinction between upgrades/enhancements and new products; when technological feasibility is achieved for our products; the potential outcome of future taxconsequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns; and determining when investment impairments are other-than-temporary. Actual results and outcomes may differ from management s estimates andassumptions. Interim results are not necessarily indicative of results for a full year. The information included in this Form 10-Qshould be read in conjunction with Management s Discussion and Analysis and the financial statements and notes thereto included in the Microsoft Corporation 2006 Form 10-K. As discussed in Note 8, effective July 1, 2006, we reorganized our business into five operating segments, organized under one of three operatingdivisions. Accordingly, we have restated prior period segment information to conform to the current period presentation. Basis ofConsolidation The financial statements include the accounts of Microsoft Corporation and its subsidiaries. Intercompanytransactions and balances have been eliminated. Equity investments in which we exercise significant influence but do not exercise control and are not the primary beneficiary are accounted for using the equity method. Investments in which we are notable to exercise significant influence over the investee are accounted for under the cost method. Note 2 Inventories, net Components of inventories were as follows: Note 3 Earnings Per Share Basic earnings per share is computed on the basis of the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. Diluted earningsper share is computed on the basis of the weighted average number of shares of common stock plus the effect of dilutive potential common shares outstanding during the period using the treasury stock method. Dilutive potential common shares includeoutstanding stock options, stock awards, and shared performance stock awards. 5 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) (Unaudited) Components of basic and diluted earnings per share were as follows: The following shares attributable to outstanding stock options were excluded from the calculationof diluted earnings per share because their inclusion would have been anti-dilutive. In addition, the following shared performance stock awards have been excluded from the calculation of diluted earnings per share because the number of sharesultimately issued is contingent on our performance against metrics established for the performance period. Note 4 Unearned Revenue Components of unearned revenue were as follows: Unearned revenue by segment was as follows: 6 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) (Unaudited) The increase in Client and Microsoft Business Division unearned revenue was primarily attributable toundelivered elements associated with the Express Upgrade to Windows Vista and Microsoft Office Technology Guarantee programs and shipments currently in the channel that will be recognized upon consumer launch of Windows Vista and the 2007 MicrosoftOffice system. The technology guarantee programs provide consumers who purchase current products with free or discounted rights to Windows Vista and the 2007 Microsoft Office system when those products become available to consumers. The unearnedrevenue balance reflects an increase from June 30, 2006 primarily due to revenue deferrals from the above programs totaling $45 million and $1.6 billion in the first and second quarters of fiscal year 2007, respectively. Note 5 Stockholders Equity OnJuly 20, 2006, we announced that our Board of Directors authorized two new share repurchase programs: a $20 billion tender offer, which was completed on August 17, 2006; and authorization for up to an additional $20 billion ongoing sharerepurchase program with an expiration of June 30, 2011. Under the tender offer, we repurchased approximately 155 million shares of common stock, or 1.5% of our common shares outstanding, for approximately $3.8 billion at a price per shareof $24.75. On August 18, 2006, we announced that the authorization for the $20 billion ongoing share repurchase program had been increased by approximately $16.2 billion. As a result, we are authorized to repurchase additional shares in anamount up to $36.2 billion through June 30, 2011. As of December 31, 2006, approximately $29.3 billion remained of the $36.2 billion approved repurchase amount. All repurchases were made using cash. The repurchase program may be suspendedor discontinued at any time without notice. In any period, cash used in financing activities related to common stock repurchased may differ from the comparable change in stockholders equity, reflecting timing differences between therecognition of share repurchase transactions and their settlement for cash. We repurchased common stock in fiscal year 2006 pursuant tothe repurchase program approved by our Board of Directors on July 20, 2004 to buy back up to $30 billion of Microsoft common stock. On July 20, 2006, we announced the completion of that repurchase program. The repurchases were made usingour cash resources. We repurchased the following shares of common stock under the above-described repurchase plans: In December 2006, JP Morgan Chase Bank ( JPMorgan ) exercised approximately113 million call options for $3.3 billion at an average price per share of $28.80. The call options were among 345 million options acquired by JPMorgan in fiscal year 2004 through our employee stock option transfer program. The otherapproximately 232 million options expired unexercised and, as of December 31, 2006, no options transferred in the program remained outstanding. 7 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) (Unaudited) During the six months ended December 31, 2006, and 2005, our Board of Directors declared thefollowing dividends: Note 6 Investment Income and Other Components of investment income and other were as follows: Note 7 Contingencies Government competition law matters. In March 2004, the European Commission issued a decision in its competition law investigation of us. The Commission concluded that we infringed European competitionlaw by refusing to provide our competitors with licenses to certain protocol technology in the Windows server operating systems and by including streaming media playback functionality in Windows desktop operating systems. The Commission ordered usto make the relevant licenses to our technology available to our competitors and to develop and make available a version of the Windows desktop operating system that does not include specified software relating to media playback. The decision alsoimposed a fine of 497 million ($605 million). We appealed the decision to the Court of First Instance, on the basis that we did not infringe European competition law. In July 2006 the European Commission announced its determination thatwe had not complied with the technical documentation requirements of the 2004 Decision, and levied a fine of 281 million ($351 million). We have appealed this fine to the Court of First Instance. Both fines have been paid, pendingappeals. In December 2005, the Korean Fair Trade Commission ( KFTC ) announced a ruling in its investigation of us, holding thatwe abused a market dominant position and engaged in unfair trade practices under the Korean Fair Trade Act by incorporating instant messaging and media player functionality into the Windows PC operating system, and streaming media technologies intothe Windows server operating system. The KFTC also imposed a fine of approximately $34 million. The KFTC s ruling and corrective order issued in February 2006 held that our integration of Windows Media Player and Windows Messenger in Windows PCoperating systems and 8 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) (Unaudited) integration of Windows Media Services in Windows server operating systems constituted an abuse of monopoly power and unlawful tying in violation of theKorean Fair Trade Act. Under the order, which became effective in August 2006, we are required to develop and distribute in Korea versions of Windows XP and its successors that do not include Windows Media Player or Windows Messenger functionality.In addition, we also may distribute a second modified version of Windows that contains the removed functionality, provided the second version includes promotional links in the user interface that will enable consumers to link to and download aselect group of competing media players and instant messengers. We have appealed the KFTC s decision to the Seoul High Court. In May 2006, the KFTC denied our motion for reconsideration of its ruling, but also dropped the element of itsruling that prohibited us from including Windows Media Player or Windows Messenger, or any feature with similar functionality, in any product other than the Windows client operating system for which we have a 50% or greater market share. OnAugust 23, 2006, we announced the release to manufacture of the mandated versions of Windows XP Home Edition and Windows XP Professional Edition. In other ongoing investigations, various foreign governments and several state attorneys general have requested information from us concerning competition, privacy, and security issues. Antitrust, unfair competition, and overcharge class actions. A large number of antitrust and unfair competition class action lawsuits havebeen filed against us in various state and federal courts on behalf of variously defined classes of direct and indirect purchasers of our PC operating system and certain software applications products. We were successful in obtaining dismissals ofdamages claims of indirect purchasers under federal law and in 15 states. Courts refused to certify classes in two additional states. We have reached agreements to settle all claims in a number of other cases. Under the settlements, class memberswill be able to obtain vouchers that entitle the class members to be reimbursed up to the face value of their vouchers for purchases of a wide variety of platform-neutral computer hardware and software. The total value of vouchers that may be issuedvaries by state. A percentage of those vouchers that are not issued or claimed (one-half to two-thirds depending on the state) will be made available to certain schools. The total value of vouchers ultimately issued will depend on the number ofclass members who make claims and are issued vouchers. The maximum value of vouchers to be issued in these settlements is approximately $2.5 billion. The actual costs of these settlements will be less than that maximum amount, depending on thenumber of class members and schools who are issued and redeem vouchers. The settlements in most states have received final court approval. Settlements in Arkansas and Wisconsin have received preliminary court approval. The cases in Mississippi havenot been settled. In Iowa, a jury trial on the plaintiffs claims began in November 2006. We estimate the total cost to resolve all of these cases will range between $1.5 billion and $1.8 billion, with the actual cost dependent upon manyunknown factors such as the quantity and mix of products for which claims will be made, the number of eligible class members who ultimately use the vouchers, the nature of hardware and software that is acquired using the vouchers, and the cost ofadministering the claims process. In accordance with SFAS No. 5, Accounting for Contingencies , and FIN No. 14, Reasonable Estimation of the Amount of a Loss, at December 31, 2006, we have recorded a liability related tothese claims of approximately $1.1 billion, which reflects our estimated exposure of $1.5 billion less payments made to date of approximately $400 million, primarily for administrative expenses and legal fees. Other antitrust litigation and claims. In November 2004, Novell, Inc. filed a complaint in the U.S. District Court for Utah, now consolidatedwith other cases in Maryland, asserting antitrust and unfair competition claims against us related to Novell s ownership of WordPerfect and other productivity applications during the 9 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) (Unaudited) period between June 1994 and March 1996. In June 2005, the trial court granted our motion to dismiss four of six claims of the complaint. An appeal ofthat ruling is now pending and the case is effectively stayed during the appeal. Patent and intellectual property claims. Weare a defendant in more than 35 patent infringement cases that we are defending vigorously. In the case of Eolas Technologies, Inc. and University of California v. Microsoft , filed in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District ofIllinois in February 1999, the plaintiffs alleged infringement by the browser functionality of Windows. In January 2004, the trial court entered final judgment of $565 million, and entered an injunction against distribution of any new infringingproducts, but stayed execution of the judgment and the injunction pending our appeal. We appealed and in March 2005 the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit reversed the decision and vacated the judgment, based on certain evidentiaryrulings of the trial court. The appellate court also reversed the trial court s decision that the inventors had not engaged in inequitable conduct. We believe the total cost to resolve this case will not be material to our financial position,results of operations, or our cash flows. The actual costs will be dependent upon many unknown factors such as the events of a retrial of the plaintiff s claims. In Microsoft v. Lucent , filed in the U.S. District Court in San Diego inApril 2003, we are seeking a declaratory judgment that we do not infringe any valid patent among a number of patents Lucent has been asserting against computer manufacturers that sell computers with our software pre-installed. The first in aseries of back-to-back trials on the various patent groupings is currently set to begin in January 2007. In March 2006, Lucent filed a new lawsuit against us in U.S. District Court in San Diego, claiming the Xbox 360 violates one of the patents thatearlier had been dismissed from the older lawsuit. In response to Lucent s new complaint, we asserted patent infringement counterclaims accusing Lucent of infringing 10 Microsoft patents by its sales of various products. No trial date has beenset in the new lawsuit. In Z4 Technologies, Inc. v. Microsoft, the plaintiff alleged that Microsoft Windows and Office product activation functionality violates its patent rights. In April 2006, the jury rendered a $115 million verdictagainst us. In August 2006, the trial court increased damages by $25 million pursuant to the jury s finding of willful infringement and awarded Z4 $2 million in attorneys fees. We have appealed the verdict. In Veritas OperatingCorporation v. Microsoft , filed in the U.S. District Court for the Western District of Washington in May 2006, a subsidiary of Symantec filed an action asserting claims of trade secret misappropriation, breach of contract, and patentinfringement relating to certain storage technologies. Adverse outcomes in some or all of the matters described in this paragraph may result in significant monetary damages or injunctive relief against us that would adversely affect distribution ofour operating system or application products. The risks associated with an adverse decision may result in material settlements. Other. We are also subject to a variety of other claims and suits that arise from time to time in the ordinary course of our business. Although management currently believes that resolving claims against us, individually or inaggregate, will not have a material adverse impact on our financial position, our results of operations, or our cash flows, these matters are subject to inherent uncertainties and management s view of these matters may change in the future. As of December 31, 2006, we had accrued aggregate liabilities totaling approximately $800 million in other current liabilities andapproximately $700 million in other long-term liabilities for all of the contingent matters described in this note. While we intend to vigorously defend these matters, there exists the possibility of adverse outcomes which we estimate could be up to$1.0 billion in aggregate beyond recorded amounts. Were an unfavorable final outcome to occur, there exists the possibility of a material adverse impact on the Company s financial position, results of operations, and cash flows for the periodin which the effect becomes reasonably estimable. 10 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) (Unaudited) Note 8 Segment Information SFAS No. 131, Disclosures about Segments of an Enterprise and Related Information , requires segmentation based on our internal organizationand reporting of revenue and operating income based upon internal accounting methods. Our financial reporting systems present various data for management to run the business, including internal profit and loss statements prepared on a basis notconsistent with U.S. GAAP. Effective July 1, 2006, we reorganized our business into five operating segments, organized under one of three operating divisions Platforms and Services Division, Microsoft Business Division, and Entertainmentand Devices Division. The five operating segments are described below. The first three of these comprise the Platforms and ServicesDivision. Client includes the former Client segment. Client generates nearly all of its revenue from the licensing of theWindows line of operating systems, including Windows Vista, Windows XP Professional and Home, Media Center Edition, Tablet PC Edition, and other standard Windows operating systems. Server and Tools includes the former Server and Tools segment, excluding Exchange Server, Exchange client access licenses and a portion of Coreclient access licenses which are now a part of the Microsoft Business Division. Server and Tools generates revenues from the following products: Windows Server operating system, Microsoft SQL Server, Visual Studio, Forefront securityfamily of products, and Biz Talk Server among others. In addition, Server and Tools provides the following services: Microsoft Consulting Services; Premier; and professional support services. Online Services Business ( OSB ) includes the former MSN segment and Windows Live. OSB derives its revenue principally through thedelivery of advertising and paid search. OSB also generates services revenue through providing the following online offerings: MSN Internet Access; MSN Premium Web Services (consisting of MSN Internet Software Subscriptions, MSN Hotmail Plus, MSNBill Pay, and MSN Radio Plus); and MSN Mobile Services. Microsoft Business Division ( MBD ) includes the formerInformation Worker and Microsoft Business Solutions segments, and the Exchange Server business and certain client access licenses formerly included in the Server and Tools segment. MBD derives its revenues principally through the Microsoft Officesystem which includes: Microsoft Office, Microsoft Project; Microsoft Visio; Microsoft Access; SharePoint Portal Server client access licenses; OneNote; Office Communication Server; Microsoft Office Small Business Accounting; and revenues generatedby Microsoft LiveMeeting. Product revenues are also derived through licensing the Dynamics suite of software including: Microsoft Dynamics AX; Microsoft Dynamics CRM; Microsoft Dynamics GP; Microsoft Dynamics NAV; Microsoft Dynamics SL; andMicrosoft Dynamics Retail Management System. Entertainment and Devices Division ( EDD ) includes the former Home andEntertainment and Mobile and Embedded Devices segments. EDD generates product revenues through both hardware and software sales and licensing. The Xbox 360 console generates the majority of hardware revenue with the remainder driven by consumerperipherals and accessories, including the Zune digital music and entertainment device. Software revenues are generated by Xbox games; games for Windows; Mac Office; MSTV Platforms; Windows Mobile software platform and Windows Embedded deviceoperating system. Online services revenues are generated by certain product support and Xbox Live. 11 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) (Unaudited) Segment revenue and operating income/(loss) was as follows: Operating costs included in one segment may benefit other segments, and therefore these segmentsare not designed to measure operating income or loss directly related to the products included in each segment. Intersegment cost commissions are estimated by management and used to compensate or charge each segment for such shared costs and toincent shared efforts. Reconciling amounts include adjustments to conform significant internal accounting policies with U.S. GAAP andcorporate-level activity not specifically attributed to a segment. Certain revenue and expenses, including legal settlements and legal contingencies, are excluded from segments or included in corporate-level activity. Significant reconciling itemsto arrive at operating income were as follows: 12 Table of Contents MICROSOFT CORPORATION NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) (Unaudited) Note 9 Goodwill During the six months ended December 31, 2006, we recorded goodwill resulting from the following acquisitions: All of the entities were consolidated with Microsoft since their respective acquisition dates. The purchase price allocations for these acquisitions are preliminary and subject to revision as more detailed analysesare completed and additional information about fair value of assets and liabilities becomes available. Any change in the fair value of the net assets of the acquired companies will change the amount of the purchase price allocable to goodwill. Proforma results of operations have not been presented because the effects of these acquisitions, individually and in the aggregate, were not material. 13 Table of Contents REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM To the Board of Directors andStockholders of Microsoft Corporation Redmond, Washington We havereviewed the accompanying consolidated balance sheet of Microsoft Corporation and subsidiaries as of December 31, 2006, and the related consolidated statements of income, stockholders equity, and cash flows for the three-month andsix-month periods ended December 31, 2006 and 2005. These interim financial statements are the responsibility of the Corporation s management. We conducted our reviews in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). A review of interim financial information consists principally of applying analyticalprocedures and making inquiries of persons responsible for financial and accounting matters. It is substantially less in scope than an audit conducted in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (UnitedStates), the objective of which is the expression of an opinion regarding the financial statements taken as a whole. Accordingly, we do not express such an opinion. Based on our reviews, we are not aware of any material modifications that should be made to such consolidated interim financial statements for them to be in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted inthe United States of America. We have previously audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting OversightBoard (United States), the consolidated balance sheet of Microsoft Corporation and subsidiaries as of June 30, 2006, and the related consolidated statements of income, stockholders equity, and cash flows for the year then ended (notpresented herein); and in our report dated August 22, 2006, we expressed an unqualified opinion on those consolidated financial statements. In our opinion, the information set forth in the accompanying consolidated balance sheet as ofJune 30, 2006 is fairly stated, in all material respects, in relation to the consolidated balance sheet from which it has been derived. DELOITTE TOUCHE LLP /s/ D ELOITTE T OUCHE LLP Seattle, Washington January 23, 2007 14 Table of Contents °Item 2. Management s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Special Note About Forward-Looking Statements Certain statements in Management s Discussion and Analysis( MD A ), other than purely historical information, including estimates, projections, statements relating to our business plans, objectives and expected operating results, and the assumptions upon which those statements are based, are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. These forward-lookingstatements generally are identified by the words believe, project, expect, anticipate, estimate, intend, strategy, plan, may, should, will, would, will be, will continue, will likely result, and similar expressions. Forward-looking statements are based on current expectations and assumptions that aresubject to risks and uncertainties which may cause actual results to differ materially from the forward-looking statements. A detailed discussion of risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results and events to differ materially from suchforward-looking statements is included in the section entitled Risk Factors (refer to Part II, Item 1A). We undertake no obligation to update or revise publicly any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information,future events, or otherwise. OVERVIEW The following MD A is intended to help the reader understand the results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows of Microsoft Corporation. MD A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read inconjunction with, our financial statements and the accompanying notes to the financial statements ( Notes ). We develop,manufacture, license, and support a wide range of software products for many computing devices. Our software products include operating systems for servers, PCs, and intelligent devices; server applications for distributed computing environments;information worker productivity applications; business solutions applications; and software development tools. We provide consulting and product support services, and we train and certify system integrators and developers. We sell the Xbox videogame console and games, the Zune digital music and entertainment device, PC games, and PC peripherals. Online communication and information services are delivered through our MSN portals and channels around the world and Live Search. Our revenue historically has fluctuated quarterly and has generally been the highest in the second quarter of our fiscal year due to corporate calendaryear-end spending trends in our major markets and holiday season spending by consumers. Our Entertainment and Devices Division is particularly seasonal as its products are aimed at the consumer market and are in highest demand during the holidayshopping season. Typically, Entertainment and Devices has generated over 40% of its yearly segment revenues in our second fiscal quarter. We believe the seasonality of revenue is likely to continue in the future. Summary For the three and six months ended December 31, 2006, revenue growth was impacted by the $1.6billion second quarter revenue deferral from the Express Upgrade to Windows Vista and Microsoft Office Technology Guarantee programs and pre-shipments of Windows Vista and the 2007 Microsoft Office system. The technology guarantee programs provideconsumers who purchase current products with free or discounted rights to Windows 15 Table of Contents Vista and the 2007 Microsoft Office system when those products become available to consumers. Our revenue increase for the three and six months endedDecember 31, 2006 was driven primarily by sales of the Xbox 360 console which was launched in November 2005, sales of Zune, our digital music and entertainment device which was launched in November 2006, and increased licensing of SQL Server,Windows Server, and Visual Studio. For the three months and six months ended December 31, 2006, operating income decreased primarilyreflecting the revenue deferral, a shift to products with lower margins, and increased headcount-related costs as we continue to invest in our new and upcoming offerings such as the 2007 Microsoft Office system, the Windows Live platform, and Zune.Headcount-related costs, including stock-based compensation expense, increased 10% and 16%, respectively, during the three and six months ended December 31, 2006, reflecting a 15% increase in headcount over the past 12 months, an increase insalaries and benefits for existing headcount, and offsetting impacts of five and two percentage points, respectively, resulting from the capitalization of certain software development costs. For the remainder of the fiscal year, we expect revenue to grow at a higher rate than fiscal year 2006, mainly reflecting significant product launches infiscal year 2007. We expect to recognize the $1.6 billion of revenue deferred in the second quarter with the consumer launch of Windows Vista and 2007 Microsoft Office system during the third quarter of fiscal year 2007. We expect our operatingincome growth rate in fiscal year 2007 will lag behind our revenue growth rate. We expect our level of spending to increase in four key areas in fiscal year 2007: increased product costs associated with Xbox consoles and Zune devices; marketing andfield sales spending including product launch costs; quickening the pace of development in growth areas such as business intelligence, security, management and unified communications (including through acquisitions); and increased costs to executeon our online services strategy. While these investments will translate into increased operating expenses, we believe they will help lay the groundwork for future growth and profitability. SEGMENT PRODUCT REVENUE/OPERATING INCOME (LOSS) Revenue and operating income/(loss) amounts in this section are presented on a basis consistent with U.S. GAAP and include certain reconciling items attributable to each of the segments. Segment information appearing in Note 8 Segment Information of the Notes is presented on a basis consistent with the Company s current internal management reporting, in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ) No. 131, Disclosures aboutSegments of an Enterprise and Related Information . Certain corporate-level activity has been excluded from segment operating results and is presented separately. Fiscal year 2006 amounts have been restated for certain internal reorganizations. Client Client consists of premium edition operating systems, including Windows XP Professional, MediaCenter Edition, Tablet PC Edition, and standard Windows operating systems, including Windows XP Home and Windows Vista. Premium offerings are Windows operating systems sold at a premium above Windows XP Home. Client revenue growth correlates withthe growth of purchases of PCs from OEMs that pre-install versions of Windows operating systems because the OEM channel accounts for approximately 80% of total Client revenue. Client revenue decreased for the three months ended December 31, 2006, primarily reflecting approximately $1.1 billion of revenue deferred as aresult of the Express Upgrade to Windows Vista program and shipments 16 Table of Contents currently in the channel that will be recognized upon consumer launch of Windows Vista. This revenue deferral was partially offset by 10% growth in OEMlicense units from increased PC unit shipments. During the quarter, the mix of OEM Windows operating systems licensed with premium edition operating systems as a percentage of total OEM Windows operating systems licensed ( OEM PremiumMix ) increased 18 percentage points to 67% over the prior year driven by the continued demand for Windows Media Center Edition. The differences between unit growth rates and revenue growth rates from year to year are affected by changes in theOEM Premium Mix, changes in the geographical mix, and the channel mix of products sold by large, multi-national OEMs versus those sold by local and regional system builders. Client revenue decreased during the six months ended December 31,2006, reflecting the revenue deferrals, partially offset by 11% growth in OEM license units from increased PC unit shipments. Based on our preliminary estimates, total worldwide PC shipments from all sources grew 8% to 10% from the second quarter ofthe previous year and approximately 8% to 10% from the first half of the previous year driven by strong consumer demand in both emerging and mature markets. Client operating income decreased during the three and six months ended December 31, 2006, reflecting the decreased revenue and increased costs of sales, including support costs, which were partially offset bydecreased research and development expenses reflecting the capitalization of certain Windows Vista software development costs in the second quarter of fiscal year 2007. Headcount-related costs decreased 25% and 3%, respectively, during the three andsix months ended December 31, 2006, reflecting an increase in salaries and benefits for existing headcount, a 5% increase in headcount, and offsetting impacts of 32 and 16 percentage points, respectively, resulting from the capitalization ofcertain software development costs. For the remainder of fiscal year 2007, we expect revenue to grow reflecting improvement in thecommercial and retail portion of the business due to the launch of Windows Vista. We expect our third quarter revenue to increase significantly as we recognize the $1.1 billion of revenue that was deferred in the second quarter. We expect PCshipments to grow 8% to 10% for fiscal year 2007. We believe that PC unit growth rates will be higher in the consumer segment than in the business segment and higher in emerging markets than in mature markets. Server and Tools Server and Tools consists of server software licenses and client access licenses ( CAL )for Windows Server, Microsoft SQL Server, and other server products. It also includes developer tools, training, certification, Microsoft Press, Premier and Professional product support services, and Microsoft Consulting Services. Server and Toolsconcentrates on licensing products, applications, tools, content, and services that make information technology professionals and developers more productive and efficient. The segment uses multiple channels for licensing including pre-installed OEMversions, licenses through partners, and licenses directly to end customers. The licenses are sold both as one-time licenses and as multi-year volume licenses. Server and server application revenue, including CAL revenue, and developer tools, training and certification revenue, increased $319 million or 16% during the three months and $643 million or 17% during the sixmonths ended December 31, 2006. This increase was primarily driven by increased revenue associated with SQL Server, Windows Server, and Visual Studio and reflects broad adoption of Windows Server products. SQL Server 2005 and Visual Studio 2005were launched in the second quarter of fiscal year 2006 and continue to produce revenue growth with SQL Server growing over 30% for the quarter and first half of fiscal year 2007. Overall revenue growth was also driven by Consulting, Premier, andProfessional product support services revenue which grew $88 million or 20% during the three months and $136 million or 16% during the six months ended December 31, 2006. 17 Table of Contents Server and Tools operating income increased during the three and six months ended December 31, 2006,primarily reflecting the increased revenue, partially offset by increased headcount-related costs and cost of revenue for services. Headcount-related costs increased 11% and 12% in the second quarter and first half of fiscal year 2007, respectively,reflecting both an increase in salaries and benefits for existing headcount and a 14% increase in headcount. Cost of revenue increased $49 million or 10% in the second quarter and $92 million or 10% in the first half of fiscal year 2007, reflectingthe growth in consulting services provided. We expect continued revenue growth from fiscal year 2006 product launches and the expansion ofour products in security, management and overall Windows Server growth in fiscal year 2007. We continue to estimate that overall server hardware unit shipments will grow 10% to 12% in fiscal year 2007. Online Services Business Online Services Business ( OSB ) includes personal communications services, such ase-mail and instant messaging, and online information offerings, such as Live Search, and the MSN portals and channels around the world. OSB also provides a variety of online services such as MSN Internet Access, MSN Premium Web Services and OneCare. Revenue is derived primarily from advertisers on MSN.com and Live Search, from consumers and partners through subscriptions and transactions generated from online paid services, and from MSN narrowband Internet access subscribers. AdCenter our internally developed advertising platform now serves all paid search traffic on our online properties in the U.S. and in certain international markets. We continue to launch new online initiatives and expect to do so in the future.For example, in the first half of fiscal year 2007, we have launched Live Search and Live.com in 47 international markets, Live Local Search in the U.S. and U.K., beta versions of MSN Soapbox (our expansion of the MSN Video experience), VirtualEarth TM 3D and other offerings. OSB revenue increased during the three months ended December 31, 2006, primarily driven by advertising revenue which increased $77 million or 20% to $462 million, due primarily to growth in display advertisingfor home page, portals, channels, email, and messaging services, partially offset by a $42 million or 31% decrease in access revenue. OSB revenue was flat during the six months ended December 31, 2006, primarily reflecting advertising revenuegrowth of $94 million or 13% to $836 million, which was offset by a $85 million or 30% decrease in access revenue. The increase in advertising revenue during the six months ended December 31, 2006 reflects increased display revenue partiallyoffset by decreased search revenue as a result of the ongoing transition to adCenter. At December 31, 2006, OSB had 1.8 million access subscribers and 10.7 million total subscribers compared with 2.5 million access subscribersand 9.8 million total subscribers at December 31, 2005. In addition, we estimate that OSB has over 268 million active Hotmail accounts and over 263 million active Messenger accounts. OSB operating income decreased for the three and six months ended December 31, 2006, primarily reflecting increased headcount-related costsprimarily as a result of continued investments in Windows Live, adCenter, and other properties, and increased cost of revenue as a result of the continued build out of our data center infrastructure. Headcount-related costs increased 36% and 39%,respectively, during the three and six months ended December 31, 2006, reflecting both a 36% increase in headcount and an increase in salaries and benefits for existing headcount. For the remainder of fiscal year 2007, we expect increased growth in display advertising revenue as the portals, channels, and communications servicescontinue to expand globally and the overall Internet advertising 18 Table of Contents market continues to expand. Search revenue is expected to benefit from the transition to adCenter in fiscal year 2007 despite market share pressure on searchqueries, while revenue from narrowband Internet Access is expected to continue to decline. Microsoft Business Division Microsoft Business Division ( MBD ) consists of programs, servers, services, andsolutions designed to increase personal, team, and organization productivity. MBD includes the Microsoft Office system, Microsoft Dynamics, and the Microsoft Partner Program. MBD also includes the Small and Mid-market Solutions Partnersorganization, which focuses on helping Microsoft, its customers, and industry partners in the small and mid-market customer segments. Our Office System products represent over 90% of Microsoft Business Division revenues and include Microsoft Office,Microsoft Exchange Server and CALs, Microsoft Project, Microsoft Visio, Microsoft Office Communications Server, Sharepoint Portal Server and CALs, Microsoft LiveMeeting, and One Note. Revenue growth depends on the ability to add value to the coreOffice product set and expand our product offerings in other information worker and business solution areas such as document lifecycle management, collaboration, business intelligence, customer relationship management, and enterprise resourceplanning. MBD revenue decreased during the three and six months ended December 31, 2006, primarily reflecting approximately $500million of revenue deferred during the second quarter as a result of the Microsoft Office Technology Guarantee program and shipments currently in the channel that will be recognized upon the launch of the 2007 Microsoft Office system. Non-OEMrevenue, which includes volume licensing, retail packaged products, and preinstalled versions of Office in Japan, decreased $170 million or 5% during the three months ended December 31, 2006, reflecting $312 million of revenue deferred for theMicrosoft Office Technology Guarantee program and 2007 Microsoft Office system shipments currently in the channel. OEM revenue decreased $7 million or 2%, reflecting $188 million of revenue deferred for the Microsoft Office Technology Guaranteeprogram. During the six months ended December 31, 2006, OEM revenue decreased $11 million or 1% while non-OEM revenue, which reflects a 19% increase in Microsoft Dynamics customer billings, remained flat. MBD operating income decreased during the three months ended December 31, 2006, reflecting the decrease in revenue and an increase in sales andmarketing expenses primarily related to the 2007 Microsoft Office system. MBD operating income decreased during the six months ended December 31, 2006, reflecting the decrease in revenue and an increase in costs associated with the 2007Microsoft Office system. During the three and six months ended December 31, 2006, headcount-related costs increased 5% and 11%, respectively, reflecting an 8% increase in headcount over the past 12 months, an increase in salaries and benefitsfor existing headcount, and offsetting impacts of five and three percentage points, respectively, resulting from the capitalization of certain software development costs. For the remainder of fiscal year 2007, we expect revenue growth in both non-OEM and OEM offerings due to the launch of the 2007 Microsoft Office system. We expect our third quarter revenue to increase significantly aswe recognize the approximately $500 million of revenue that was deferred in the second quarter. We continue to develop plans to drive revenue growth in new areas such as unified communications and through our existing portfolio of Microsoft Dynamicsproducts. 19 Table of Contents Entertainment and Devices Division Entertainment and Devices Division ( EDD ) products include the Microsoft Xbox videogame console system, PC games, consumer software and hardware products, the Zune digital music and entertainment device, TV platform products for the interactive television industry, and Mobile and Embedded devices (principally Windows Mobilesoftware platform and Windows Embedded device operating system). The success of video game consoles is determined by console innovation, the portfolio of video game content for the console, online offerings, and the market share of the console. Webelieve that the functionality of the Xbox 360 console, games portfolio, and online offerings are well-positioned relative to competitive consoles launched during the quarter. We also believe launching in advance of competing consoles willprovide a strategic advantage for the long-term success of Xbox 360. EDD revenue increased during the three and six months endedDecember 31, 2006, primarily driven by increased Xbox 360 console sales, sales of Zune after its November 2006 launch, and increased Xbox accessories and video game sales led by the Xbox 360 title Gears of War. Xbox and PC game revenueincreased by approximately $1.0 billion or 76% during the three months and $1.3 billion or 82% during the six months ended December 31, 2006, as a result of higher console volumes and related accessories and video game sales. We soldapproximately 4.4 million Xbox 360 consoles during the second quarter and approximately 5.4 million Xbox 360 consoles during the first half of fiscal year 2007. Since the Xbox 360 console was launched in November 2005, we have soldapproximately 10.4 million units. Revenue from Zune, consumer hardware and software, and TV platforms increased $260 million or 104% during the three months and $323 or 71% during the six months ended December 31, 2006, primarilyreflecting the recent release of Zune, new consumer hardware products, and deployments of MSTV products. Mobile and Embedded Devices revenue increased $29 million or 22% during the three months and $71 million or 31% during the six months endedDecember 31, 2006, driven by sales growth in Windows Mobile software and Windows Embedded operating systems. Increased revenue for Windows Mobile software was primarily driven by increased market demand for phone-enabled PDAs and Smartphones,partially offset by decreased volume shipments for standalone PDAs. The increase in Windows Embedded revenue was due to our operating system being included in new product designs for both new and existing customers. EDD operating loss in the second quarter of fiscal year 2007 was flat relative to the prior year and decreased during the six months endedDecember 31, 2006, reflecting increased revenue and lower Xbox 360 console per unit cost of goods sold, offset by development and marketing expenses primarily related to Xbox and the launch of Zune, and increased Xbox 360 console warranty andrepair expenses. Xbox 360 console warranty and repair expenses were primarily driven by the extension of the Xbox 360 console product warranty from 90 days to one year in the United States and Canada. Headcount-related costs increased 12% and 15%during the three and six months ended December 31, 2006, reflecting both an increase in salaries and benefits for existing headcount and a 17% increase in headcount. In fiscal year 2007, we expect revenue to increase due to the increased availability of Xbox 360 during the entire fiscal year and sales of Zune after its November 2006 launch. The availability of a commercial IPTVproduct is expected to drive growth in MSTV revenue across several geographies. Revenue from existing mobility and embedded devices is expected to increase due to unit volume increases of Windows Mobile software driven by increased market demand forphone-enabled devices and Windows Embedded operating systems. Short product life cycles in product lines such as Windows Mobile software may impact our continuing revenue streams. 20 Table of Contents Corporate-Level Results Certain corporate-level results are not allocated to our segments. Those results include expensesrelated to corporate operations associated with broad-based sales and marketing, product support services, human resources, legal, finance, information technology, corporate development and procurement activities, research and development and othercosts, and legal settlements and contingencies. Corporate-level expenses increased during the three months ended December 31, 2006,primarily reflecting increased headcount-related costs and increased costs for legal settlements and legal contingencies. Corporate-level expenses decreased during the six months ended December 31, 2006, primarily reflecting decreased costs forlegal settlements and legal contingencies partially offset by increased headcount-related costs. We incurred $111 million and $198 million in legal charges during the three and six months ended December 31, 2006, respectively, as compared to$66 million and $515 million in legal charges during the three and six months ended December 31, 2005, respectively. Legal costs during the first half of fiscal year 2006 included a $361 million charge related to our settlement withRealNetworks, Inc. Headcount-related costs increased 24% and 27% during the three and six months ended December 31, 2006, respectively, reflecting both an increase in salaries and benefits for existing headcount and a 24% increase in headcount. Operating Expenses Cost ofRevenue Cost of revenue includes manufacturing and distribution costs for products sold and programslicensed, operating costs related to product support service centers and product distribution centers, costs incurred to support and maintain Internet-based products and services, and costs associated with the delivery of consulting services. Costof revenue increased in the three and six months ended December 31, 2006, primarily driven by an increase in the number of total Xbox consoles sold, costs associated with Zune, and OSB costs to continue building out our data centerinfrastructure. Research and Development Research and development expenses include payroll, employee benefits, stock-based compensationexpense, and other headcount-related costs associated with product development. Research and development expenses also include third-party development and programming costs, localization costs incurred to translate software for internationalmarkets, and the amortization of purchased software code and services content. Research and development costs increased during the three and six months ended December 31, 2006, primarily as a result of increased headcount-related costs anddevelopment costs associated with new offerings including our Windows 21 Table of Contents Live platform, Windows Vista, the 2007 Microsoft Office system, Unified Communications, and Zune. The increases in research and development costs werepartially offset by the capitalization of approximately $120 million of certain software development costs primarily associated with Windows Vista and the 2007 Microsoft Office system. Headcount-related costs decreased 1% and increased 7% during thethree and six months ended December 31, 2006, respectively, reflecting a 17% increase in headcount, an increase in salaries and benefits for existing headcount, and offsetting impacts of 11 and six percentage points, respectively, resultingfrom the capitalization of certain software development costs. Sales and Marketing Sales and marketing expenses include payroll, employee benefits, stock-based compensation expense,and other headcount-related costs associated with sales and marketing personnel and advertising, promotions, trade shows, seminars, and other programs. Sales and marketing expenses increased during the three and six months ended December 31,2006, primarily as a result of increased headcount-related costs and other marketing costs related to recent and upcoming product launches. Headcount-related costs increased 23% and 25% during the three and six months ended December 31, 2006,respectively, reflecting both an increase in salaries and benefits for existing headcount and a 15% increase in headcount. Generaland Administrative General and administrative costs include payroll, employee benefits, stock-based compensationexpense and other headcount-related costs associated with finance, legal, facilities, certain human resources, other administrative headcount, and legal and other administrative fees. General and administrative costs increased during the threemonths ended December 31, 2006, primarily reflecting increased headcount-related costs and increased costs for legal settlements and legal contingencies. General and administrative costs decreased during the six months ended December 31,2006, primarily reflecting decreased costs for legal settlements and legal contingencies partially offset by increased headcount-related costs. We incurred $111 million and $198 million in legal charges during the three and six months endedDecember 31, 2006, respectively, as compared to $66 million and $515 million in legal charges during the three and six months ended December 31, 2005, respectively. Legal costs during the first half of fiscal year 2006 included a $361million charge related to our settlement with RealNetworks, Inc. Headcount-related costs increased 11% and 17%, respectively, during the three and six months ended December 31, 2006, reflecting both an increase in salaries and benefits forexisting headcount and a 15% increase in headcount. 22 Table of Contents INVESTMENT INCOME, INCOME TAXES, AND OTHER Investment Income and Other The components of investment income and other were as follows: For the three months and six months ended December 31, 2006, dividends and interest incomedeclined, reflecting a decline in the average balance of dividend and interest-bearing investments, partly offset by higher interest rates received on our fixed-income investments. Net gains on sales of equity investments, net gains on sales offixed-income investments, and other-than-temporary impairments on both equity and fixed-income investments comprise our net recognized gains on investments. Net recognized gains for the three months ended December 31, 2006, declined primarilydue to fewer gains on the sale of equity investments in the current period as compared to the comparable period in the prior year. Other-than-temporary impairments in the second quarter of fiscal 2007 were not material and were $37 million in thecomparable quarter of the prior fiscal year. Net recognized gains for the six months ended December 31, 2006, increased primarily due to gains on sales of fixed-income investments in the current period as compared to losses in the prior period,partly offset by fewer gains on the sale of equity investments in the current period as compared to the prior period. Net gains on investments for the six months ended December 31, 2006 included $15 million in other-than-temporary impairmentsin the current period as compared to $49 million in the comparable period of the prior fiscal year. We use derivative instruments tomanage exposures to interest rates, equity prices, and foreign currency markets and to facilitate portfolio diversification. Net losses on derivatives were as follows: During the three months ended December 31, 2006, we experienced fewer net losses onderivatives as compared the comparable period in the prior year primarily reflecting smaller losses on commodity and interest rate derivatives. Additionally, net losses in time value on foreign exchange contracts used to hedge anticipated foreigncurrency revenues declined in the current period as compared to the prior period. During the six months ended December 31, 2006, net losses on derivatives were higher in the current year primarily due to losses on equity derivatives in thecurrent period as compared to gains in the prior period. 23 Table of Contents Gains and losses arising from derivatives not designated as accounting hedges are economically offset byunrealized losses and gains, respectively, in the underlying securities which are recorded as a component of other comprehensive income. Commodity derivatives are held for the purpose of portfolio diversification. Net losses related to foreigncurrency contracts relate primarily to changes in time value of options used to hedge anticipated foreign currency revenues. Additionally, net gains and losses on foreign exchange contracts include the changes in the fair value of derivatives usedas economic hedges. These gains and losses are partially offset economically by unrealized losses and gains, respectively, in the underlying assets which are included in other comprehensive income. During the second quarter of the prior fiscal year, Microsoft and NBC Universal, Inc. entered into amended and restated agreements to restructure theirjoint venture relationships for MSNBC Cable L.L.C. ( CJV ) and MSNBC Interactive News, L.L.C. ( IJV ). Investment income and other for the prior year includes a net gain related to the restructuring of CJV and IJV. We lend certain fixed-income and equity securities to increase investment returns. The loaned securities continue to be carried as investments on ourbalance sheet. Collateral and/or security interest is determined based upon the underlying security and the creditworthiness of the borrower. Cash collateral is recorded as an asset with a corresponding liability. We anticipate that the magnitude ofsecurities lent under this program will remain relatively consistent during the fiscal year. Income Taxes Our effective tax rate was 31% for the three and six months ended December 31, 2006. Our effective tax rate for the three months and six months endedDecember 31, 2005 was 29% and 30%, respectively. FINANCIAL CONDITION Cash and equivalents and short-term investments totaled $28.87 billion as of December 31, 2006, compared to $34.16 billion as of June 30, 2006.Equity and other investments were $9.63 billion as of December 31, 2006, compared to $9.23 billion as of June 30, 2006. The investment portfolio consists primarily of fixed-income securities, diversified among industries and individualissuers. Our investments are generally liquid and investment grade. The portfolio is invested predominantly in U.S.-dollar-denominated securities, but also includes foreign-denominated securities in order to diversify financial risk. The portfoliois primarily invested in short-term securities to facilitate rapid deployment for immediate cash needs. As a result of the special dividend paid in the second quarter of fiscal year 2005 and shares repurchased, our retained deficit, includingaccumulated other comprehensive income, was $24.52 billion at December 31, 2006. Our retained deficit is not expected to impact our future ability to operate or pay dividends given our continuing profitability and strong cash and financialposition. Unearned Revenue Unearned revenue from volume licensing programs represents customer billings, paid either upfront or annually at the beginning of each billing coverage period, that are accounted for as subscriptions with revenuerecognized ratably over the billing coverage period. For certain other licensing arrangements revenue attributable to undelivered elements, including free post-delivery telephone support and the right to receive unspecified upgrades/enhancements ofMicrosoft Internet Explorer on a when-and-if-available basis, is based on the sales price of those elements when sold separately and is recognized ratably on a straight-line basis over the life cycle of the related product. Other unearned revenueincludes services, TV platform, Microsoft Business Solutions, advertising, and subscriptions for which we have been paid upfront and earn the revenue when we provide the service or software or otherwise meet the revenue recognition criteria. 24 Table of Contents Unearned revenue as of December 31, 2006 increased $1.8 billion from September 30, 2006, and$1.0 billion from June 30, 2006, primarily reflecting the $1.6 billion second quarter revenue deferral. The increase from June 30, 2006 was partially offset by the recognition of unearned revenue from multi-year licensing thatexceeded deferrals by $0.7 billion. The following table outlines the expected recognition of unearned revenue as of December 31,2006: See Note 4 Unearned Revenue of the Notes to Financial Statements (Part I,Item 1) Cash Flows Cash flow from operations for the six months ended December 31, 2006 decreased $457 million from the first six months of fiscal year 2006 to $6.10 billion, due to increased payments for income taxes contributing to an $898 millionincrease in cash used for other current liabilities combined with cash used to fund other changes in working capital. These impacts were partially offset by a $1.27 billion increase in cash from deferred revenue due to increased billings in the sixmonths ended December 31, 2006. Cash used for financing was $10.50 billion in the first half of fiscal year 2007, a decrease of $245 million from the corresponding period in fiscal year 2006. Several events occurred during the first half offiscal year 2007 that affected cash used for financing. JPMorgan exercised approximately 113 million call options for $3.30 billion in December 2006 which was included in the $4.83 billion of common stock issued during the six months endedDecember 31, 2006, an increase of $3.37 billion from the same period in fiscal year 2006. We also completed our tender offer on August 17, 2006, which was included in the $13.48 billion of common stock repurchases in the six months endedDecember 31, 2006. Cash from investing was $4.50 billion in the first half of fiscal year 2007, an increase of $1.07 billion from the first half of fiscal year 2006, due to a $2.14 billion increase in net cash from combined investmentpurchases, sales, and maturities, partially offset by increased additions to property and equipment and a decline in our securities lending program in which we lend certain fixed-income and equity securities to increase investment returns. We have no material long-term borrowings. Stockholders equity at December 31, 2006, was $36.63 billion. Additions to propertyand equipment will continue, including new facilities and computer systems for research and development, sales and marketing, support, and administrative staff. We have operating leases for most U.S. and international sales and support offices. Wehave issued residual value guarantees in connection with various operating leases. These guarantees provide that if we do not purchase the leased property from the lessor at the end of the lease term, then we are liable to the lessor for an amountequal to the shortage (if any) between the proceeds from the sale of the property and an agreed value. As of December 31, 2006, the maximum amount of the residual value guarantees was approximately $271 million. We believe that proceeds fromthe sale of properties under operating leases would exceed the payment obligation and therefore no liability currently exists. We have not engaged in any related party transactions or arrangements with unconsolidated entities or other persons thatare reasonably likely to materially affect liquidity or the availability of requirements for capital resources. 25 Table of Contents On September 13, 2006, our Board of Directors declared a regular quarterly dividend of $0.10 pershare. The dividend was paid on December 14, 2006 to shareholders of record at the close of business on November 16, 2006. On December 20, 2006, our Board of Directors declared a regular quarterly dividend of $0.10 per share. Thedividend is payable on March 8, 2007 to shareholders of record at the close of business on February 15, 2007. This dividend of approximately $978 million was included in other current liabilities on our balance sheet. On September 23,2005, our Board of Directors declared a regular quarterly dividend of $0.08 per share. The dividend was paid on December 8, 2005, to shareholders of record at the close of business on November 17, 2005. On December 14, 2005, our Boardof Directors declared a regular quarterly dividend of $0.09 per share. The dividend was paid on March 9, 2006 to shareholders of record at the close of business on February 17, 2006. On July 20, 2006, we announced that our Board of Directors authorized two new share repurchase programs: a $20 billion tender offer, which wascompleted on August 17, 2006; and authorization for up to an additional $20 billion ongoing share repurchase program with an expiration of June 30, 2011. Under the tender offer, we repurchased approximately 155 million shares ofcommon stock, or 1.5% of our common shares outstanding, for approximately $3.8 billion at a price per share of $24.75. On August 18, 2006, we announced that the authorization for the $20 billion ongoing share repurchase program had beenincreased by approximately $16.2 billion. As a result, we are authorized to repurchase additional shares in an amount up to $36.2 billion through June 30, 2011. As of December 31, 2006, approximately $29.3 billion remained of the $36.2billion approved repurchase amount. We believe existing cash and equivalents and short-term investments, together with funds generatedfrom operations, should be sufficient to meet operating requirements, regular quarterly dividends, and planned share repurchases. Our philosophy regarding the maintenance of a balance sheet with a large component of cash and short-term investments,as well as equity and other investments, reflects our views on potential future capital requirements relating to research and development, creation and expansion of sales distribution channels, investments and acquisitions, share dilutionmanagement, legal risks, and challenges to our business model. We regularly assess our investment management approach in view of our current and potential future needs. Other Matters During the quarter, we finalized a set of business and technicalcollaboration agreements with Novell, Inc. that are intended to provide greater interoperability between the two companies products. As part of these arrangements, each company also announced agreements to provide their respective customerswith patent coverage for covered products. These agreements will be in place until at least 2012. The parties also provided releases to each other for prior patent infringement. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements We provide indemnifications of varying scope and amount to certain customers against claims of intellectual property infringement made by third parties arising from the use of our products. We evaluate estimated losses for suchindemnifications under SFAS No. 5, Accounting for Contingencies , as interpreted by FASB Interpretation No. 45, Guarantor s Accounting and Disclosure Requirements for Guarantees, Including Indirect Guarantees of Indebtednessof Others . We consider factors such as the degree of probability of an unfavorable outcome and the ability to make a reasonable estimate of the amount of loss. To date, we have not encountered material costs as a result of such obligations andhave not accrued any material liabilities related to such indemnifications in our financial statements. RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING STANDARDS In September 2006, the Securities and Exchange Commission issued Staff Accounting Bulletin ( SAB ) No. 108, Considering the Effects of Prior Year Misstatements when Quantifying Current Year Misstatements. SAB No. 108 requires analysis of misstatements using both an income statement (rollover) approach and a balance sheet (iron curtain)approach in assessing materiality and provides for a one-time cumulative effect 26 Table of Contents transition adjustment. SAB No. 108 is effective for our fiscal year 2007 annual financial statements. We are currently assessing the potential impactthat adoption of SAB No. 108 will have on our financial statements. In September 2006, the FASB issued SFAS No. 157, FairValue Measurements, which defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value in generally accepted accounting principles, and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. SFAS No. 157 does not require any new fairvalue measurements, but provides guidance on how to measure fair value by providing a fair value hierarchy used to classify the source of the information. This statement is effective for us beginning July 1, 2008. We are currently assessing thepotential impact that adoption of SFAS No. 157 will have on our financial statements. In June 2006, the FASB issued FIN No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes an interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109, which clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise s financial statements in accordance with FASBStatement No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes. The interpretation prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in atax return. FIN No. 48 requires recognition of tax benefits that satisfy a greater than 50% probability threshold. FIN No. 48 also provides guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods,disclosure, and transition. FIN No. 48 is effective for us beginning July 1, 2007. We are currently assessing the potential impact that adoption of FIN No. 48 will have on our financial statements. In June 2006, the FASB ratified the Emerging Issues Task Force ( EITF ) consensus on EITF Issue No. 06-2, Accountingfor Sabbatical Leave and Other Similar Benefits Pursuant to FASB Statement No. 43 . EITF Issue No. 06-2 requires companies to accrue the costs of compensated absences under a sabbatical or similar benefit arrangement over therequisite service period. EITF Issue No. 06-2 is effective for us beginning July 1, 2007. The cumulative effect of the application of this consensus on prior period results should be recognized through a cumulative-effect adjustment toretained earnings as of the beginning of the year of adoption. Elective retrospective application is also permitted. We are currently evaluating the financial impact of this guidance and the method of adoption that will be used. APPLICATION OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES Ourfinancial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Preparing financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, andexpenses. These estimates and assumptions are affected by management s application of accounting policies. Critical accounting policies for us include revenue recognition, impairment of investment securities, impairment of goodwill, accountingfor research and development costs, accounting for legal contingencies, accounting for income taxes, and accounting for stock-based compensation. We account for the licensing of software in accordance with American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Statement of Position ( SOP ) 97-2, Software Revenue Recognition . The application of SOP 97-2 requires judgment,including whether a software arrangement includes multiple elements, and if so, whether vendor-specific objective evidence ( VSOE ) of fair value exists for those elements. Customers receive certain elements of our products over a periodof time. These elements include free post-delivery telephone support and the right to receive unspecified upgrades/enhancements of Microsoft Internet Explorer on a when-and-if-available basis, the fair value of which is recognized over theproduct s estimated life cycle. Changes to the elements in a software arrangement, the ability to identify VSOE for those elements, the fair value of the respective elements, and changes to a product s estimated life cycle could materiallyimpact the amount of earned and unearned revenue. Judgment is also required to assess whether future releases of certain software represent new products or upgrades and enhancements to existing products. SFAS No. 115, Accounting for Certain Investments in Debt and Equity Securities , and SEC SAB 59, Accounting for Noncurrent MarketableEquity Securities , provide guidance on determining when an investment is other-than-temporarily impaired. Investments are reviewed quarterly for indicators of other-than-temporary impairment. This determination requires significant judgment. Inmaking this judgment, we employ a systematic 27 Table of Contents methodology quarterly that considers available quantitative and qualitative evidence in evaluating potential impairment of our investments. If the cost of aninvestment exceeds its fair value, we evaluate, among other factors, general market conditions, the duration and extent to which the fair value is less than cost, and our intent and ability to hold the investment. We also consider specific adverseconditions related to the financial health of and business outlook for the investee, including industry and sector performance, changes in technology, operational and financing cash flow factors, and rating agency actions. Once a decline in fairvalue is determined to be other-than-temporary, an impairment charge is recorded and a new cost basis in the investment is established. If market, industry, and/or investee conditions deteriorate, we may incur future impairments. SFAS No. 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets , requires that goodwill be tested for impairment at the reporting unit level (operatingsegment or one level below an operating segment) on an annual basis (July 1 for us) and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carryingvalue. These events or circumstances could include a significant change in the business climate, legal factors, operating performance indicators, competition or sale or disposition of a significant portion of a reporting unit. Application of thegoodwill impairment test requires judgment, including the identification of reporting units, assignment of assets and liabilities to reporting units, assignment of goodwill to reporting units, and determination of the fair value of each reportingunit. The fair value of each reporting unit is estimated using a discounted cash flow methodology. This requires significant judgments including estimation of future cash flows, which is dependent on internal forecasts, estimation of the long-termrate of growth for our business, the useful life over which cash flows will occur, and determination of our weighted average cost of capital. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value and/orgoodwill impairment for each reporting unit. We allocate goodwill to reporting units based on the reporting unit expected to benefit from the combination. We evaluate our reporting units on an annual basis and, if necessary, reassign goodwill usinga relative fair value allocation approach. We account for research and development costs in accordance with applicable accountingpronouncements, including SFAS No. 2, Accounting for Research and Development Costs , and SFAS No. 86, Accounting for the Costs of Computer Software to be Sold, Leased, or Otherwise Marketed . SFAS No. 86 specifies thatcosts incurred internally in researching and developing a computer software product should be charged to expense until technological feasibility has been established for the product. Once technological feasibility is established, all software costsshould be capitalized until the product is available for general release to customers. Judgment is required in determining when technological feasibility of a product is established. We have determined that technological feasibility for our softwareproducts is reached after all high-risk development issues have been resolved through coding and testing. This is generally shortly before the products are released to manufacturing. During the second quarter of fiscal year 2007, we determined thattechnological feasibility was reached with Windows Vista and the 2007 Microsoft Office system. Accordingly, we capitalized approximately $120 million of software development costs during the quarter. Previously, such costs were expensed. Theamortization of these costs will be included in cost of revenue over the estimated life of the products. The outcomes of legal proceedingsand claims brought against us are subject to significant uncertainty. SFAS No. 5, Accounting for Contingencies, requires that an estimated loss from a loss contingency such as a legal proceeding or claim should be accrued by a charge toincome if it is probable that an asset has been impaired or a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. Disclosure of a contingency is required if there is at least a reasonable possibility that a loss hasbeen incurred. In determining whether a loss should be accrued we evaluate, among other factors, the degree of probability of an unfavorable outcome and the ability to make a reasonable estimate of the amount of loss. Changes in these factors couldmaterially impact our results of operations, financial position, or our cash flows. SFAS No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes ,establishes financial accounting and reporting standards for the effect of income taxes. The objectives of accounting for income taxes are to recognize the amount of taxes payable or refundable for the current year and deferred tax liabilities andassets for the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in an entity s financial statements or tax returns. Judgment is required in assessing the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financialstatements or tax 28 Table of Contents returns. Variations in the actual outcome of these future tax consequences could materially impact our financial position, results of operations, or cashflows. Accruals for tax contingencies are provided for in accordance with the requirements of SFAS No. 5. We account for stock-basedcompensation in accordance with SFAS No. 123(R), Share-Based Payment . Under the fair value recognition provisions of this statement, share-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the value of the award and isrecognized as expense over the vesting period. Determining the fair value of share-based awards at the grant date requires judgment, including estimating expected dividends. In addition, judgment is also required in estimating the amount ofshare-based awards that are expected to be forfeited. If actual results differ significantly from these estimates, stock-based compensation expense and our results of operations could be materially impacted. °Item 3. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk We are exposed to foreign currency,interest rate, fixed-income, equity, and commodity price risks. A portion of these risks is hedged, but fluctuations could impact our results of operations, financial position, and cash flows. We hedge a portion of anticipated revenue and accountsreceivable exposure to foreign currency fluctuations, primarily with option contracts. We monitor our foreign currency exposures daily to maximize the overall effectiveness of our foreign currency hedge positions. Principal currencies hedged includethe euro, Japanese yen, British pound, and Canadian dollar. Fixed-income securities and interest rate derivatives are subject primarily to interest rate risk. The portfolio is diversified and structured to minimize credit risk. Securities held inour equity and other investments portfolio and equity derivatives are subject to price risk, and are generally not hedged. However, we use options to hedge our price risk on certain equity securities that are held primarily for strategic purposes.Commodity derivatives held for the purpose of portfolio diversification are subject to commodity price risk. We use a value-at-risk( VaR ) model to estimate and quantify our market risks. VaR is the expected loss, for a given confidence level, in fair value of our portfolio due to adverse market movements over a defined time horizon. The VaR model is not intended torepresent actual losses in fair value, but is used as a risk estimation and management tool. The model used for currencies, equities, and commodities is geometric Brownian motion, which allows incorporation of optionality with regard to these riskexposures. For interest rate risk, exposures such as key rate durations and spread durations are used in calculations that reflect the principle that fixed-income security prices revert to maturity value over time. VaR is calculated by computing the exposures of each holding s market value to a range of over 1,000 equity, fixed-income, foreign exchange, andcommodity risk factors. The exposures are then used to compute the parameters of a distribution of potential changes in the total market value of all holdings, taking into account the weighted historical volatilities of the different rates andprices and the weighted historical correlations among the different rates and prices. The VaR is then calculated as the total loss that will not be exceeded at the 97.5 percentile confidence level or, alternatively stated, the losses could exceedthe VaR in 25 out of 1,000 cases. Several risk factors are not captured in the model, including liquidity risk, operational risk, credit risk, and legal risk. Certain securities in our equity portfolio are held for strategic purposes. We hedge the value of a portion of these securities through the use of derivative contracts such as put-call collars. In these arrangements,we hedge a security s equity price risk below the purchased put strike and forgo most or all of the benefits of the security s appreciation above the sold call strike. We also hold equity securities for general investment return purposes.We have incurred material impairment charges related to these securities in previous periods. The VaR amounts disclosed below are used asa risk management tool and reflect an estimate of potential reductions in fair value of our portfolio. Losses in fair value over the specified holding period can exceed the reported VaR by significant amounts and can also accumulate over a longertime horizon than the specified 29 Table of Contents holding period used in the VaR analysis. VaR amounts are not necessarily reflective of potential accounting losses, including determinations ofother-than-temporary losses in fair value in accordance with U.S. GAAP. VaR numbers are shown separately for interest rate, currency rate,equity price, and commodity price risks. These VaR numbers include the underlying portfolio positions and related hedges. We use historical data to estimate VaR. Given the reliance on historical data, VaR is most effective in estimating riskexposures in markets in which there are no fundamental changes or shifts in market conditions. An inherent limitation in VaR is that the distribution of past changes in market risk factors may not produce accurate predictions of future market risk. The following table sets forth the one-day VaR for substantially all of our positions as of and for the three months endedDecember 31, 2006, and as of June 30, 2006: Total one-day VaR for the combined risk categories was $89 million at December 31, 2006 and$158 million at June 30, 2006. The total VaR is 40% less at December 31, 2006, and 38% less at June 30, 2006, than the sum of the separate risk categories in the above table due to the diversification benefit of the overall portfolio. °Item 4. Controls and Procedures Under the supervision and with the participation of our management,including the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, we have evaluated the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures as required by Exchange Act Rule 13a-15(b) as of the end of the period covered by this report. Based onthat evaluation, the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have concluded that these disclosure controls and procedures are effective. There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting during the quarter endedDecember 31, 2006 that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. 30 Table of Contents Part II. Other Information °Item 1. Legal Proceedings See Note 7 Contingencies of the Notes to Financial Statements (Part I,Item 1) for information regarding legal proceedings in which we are involved. °Item 1A. Risk Factors Our operations and financial results are subject to various risks anduncertainties, including those described below, that could adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows, and trading price of our common stock. Please refer also to our annual report on Form 10-K for fiscalyear 2006 for additional information concerning these and other uncertainties that could negatively impact the Company. Challenges toour business model may reduce our revenues and operating margins. Our business model has been based upon customers paying a fee to license software that we developed and distributed. Under this license-based software model, softwaredevelopers bear the costs of converting original ideas into software products through investments in research and development, offsetting these costs with the revenue received from the distribution of their products. We believe the license-basedsoftware model has had substantial benefits for users of software, allowing them to rely on our expertise and the expertise of other software developers that have powerful incentives to develop innovative software that is useful, reliable, andcompatible with other software and hardware. In recent years, certain open source software business models have evolved into a growing challenge to our license-based software model. Open source commonly refers to software whose sourcecode is subject to a license allowing it to be modified, combined with other software and redistributed, subject to restrictions set forth in the license. A number of commercial firms compete with us using an open source business model by modifyingand then distributing open source software to end users at nominal cost and earning revenue on complementary services and products. These firms do not have to bear the full costs of research and development for the software. A prominent example ofopen source software is the Linux operating system. Although we believe our products provide customers with significant advantages in security and productivity, and generally have a lower total cost of ownership than open source software, thepopularization of the open source software model continues to pose a significant challenge to our business model, including continuing efforts by proponents of open source software to convince governments worldwide to mandate the use of open sourcesoftware in their purchase and deployment of software products. To the extent open source software gains increasing market acceptance, sales of our products may decline, we may have to reduce the prices we charge for our products, and revenue andoperating margins may consequently decline. Another development is the software-as-a-service business model, by which companies provideapplications, data, and related services over the Internet. Providers use primarily advertising or subscription-based revenue models. Recent advances in computing and communications technologies have made this model viable and enabled the rapidgrowth of some of our competitors. We are devoting significant resources toward developing our own software-as-a-service strategies. It is uncertain whether these strategies will prove successful. We face intense competition. We continue to experience intense competition across all markets for our products and services. Our competitorsrange in size from Fortune 100 companies to small, specialized single-product businesses and open source community-based projects. Although we believe the breadth of our businesses and product portfolio offers benefits to our customers that are acompetitive advantage, our competitors that are focused on a narrower product line may be more effective in devoting technical, marketing, and financial resources to compete with us. In addition, barriers to entry in our businesses generally arelow. The Internet as a distribution channel and the non-commercial software model described above have reduced barriers to entry even further. Open source software vendors are devoting considerable efforts to developing software that mimics thefeatures and functionality of our products. In response to competitive factors, we are developing 31 Table of Contents versions of our products with basic functionality that are sold at lower prices than the standard versions. These competitive pressures may result in decreased sales volumes, price reductions, and/or increased operating costs, such as for marketing and sales incentives, resulting inlower revenue, gross margins and operating income. We may not be able to protect our intellectual property rights against piracy,infringement of our patents by third parties, or declining legal protection for intellectual property. We defend our intellectual property rights and combat unlicensed copying and use of software and intellectual property rights through avariety of techniques. Preventing unauthorized use or infringement of our rights is difficult. Piracy of our products represents a loss of revenue to us. While this adversely affects U.S. revenue, the impact on revenue from outside the United Statesis more significant, particularly in countries where laws are less protective of intellectual property rights. Similarly, the absence of harmonized patent laws makes it more difficult to ensure consistent respect for patent rights. Future legalchanges could make this even more challenging. Throughout the world, we actively educate consumers about the benefits of licensing genuine products and obtaining indemnification benefits for intellectual property risks, and we educate lawmakersabout the advantages of a business climate where intellectual property rights are protected. However, continued educational and enforcement efforts may fail to enhance revenue. Reductions in the legal protection for software intellectual propertyrights or compliance with additional intellectual property obligations impacting the rights of software developers could both adversely affect revenue. Third parties may claim we infringe their intellectual property rights. From time to time we receive notices from others claiming we infringe their intellectual property rights. The number of these claimsmay grow. Responding to these claims may require us to enter into royalty and licensing agreements on less favorable terms, require us to stop selling or to redesign affected products, or to pay damages or to satisfy indemnification commitments withour customers including contractual provisions under various license arrangements. If we are required to enter into such agreements or take such actions, our operating margins may decline as a result. We have made and expect to continue makingsignificant expenditures to settle claims related to the use of technology and intellectual property rights as part of our strategy to manage this risk. We may not be able to protect our source code from copying if there is an unauthorized disclosure of source code. Source code, the detailed program commands for our operating systems and other softwareprograms, is critical to our business. Although we license certain portions of our source code for various software programs and operating systems to a number of licensees, we take significant measures to protect the secrecy of large portions of oursource code. If an unauthorized disclosure of a significant portion of our source code occurs, we could potentially lose future trade secret protection for that source code. The loss of future trade secret protection could make it easier for thirdparties to compete with our products by copying functionality, which could adversely affect our revenue and operating margins. Unauthorized disclosure of source code could also increase the risks described in the next paragraph. Security vulnerabilities in our products could lead to reduced revenues or to liability claims. Maintaining the security of computers andcomputer networks is a critical issue for us and our customers. Hackers develop and deploy viruses, worms, and other malicious software programs that attack our products. Although this is an industry-wide problem that affects computers across allplatforms, it affects our products in particular because hackers tend to focus their efforts on the most popular operating systems and programs and we expect them to continue to do so. We devote significant resources to address these criticalissues. We focus on engineering even more secure products, enhancing security and reliability options and settings when we deliver products, and providing guidance to help our customers make the best use of our products and services to protectagainst computer viruses and other attacks on their computing environment. In addition, we are working to improve the deployment of software updates to address security vulnerabilities discovered after our products are released. We are alsoinvesting in mitigation technologies that help to secure customers from attacks even when such software updates are not deployed. We advise customers on how to help protect themselves from security threats through the use of our online automatedsecurity tools, our published security guidance, and the 32 Table of Contents deployment of security software such as firewalls, anti-virus, and other security software. The cost of these steps could reduce our operating margins. Despite these efforts, actual or perceived security vulnerabilities in our products could lead some customers to seek to return products, to reduce or delay future purchases, or to use competing products. Customers may also increase theirexpenditures on protecting their existing computer systems from attack, which could delay adoption of new technologies. Any of these actions by customers could adversely affect our revenue. In addition, actual or perceived vulnerabilities may leadto claims against us. Although our license agreements typically contain provisions that eliminate or limit our exposure to such liability, there is no assurance these provisions will be held effective under applicable laws and judicial decisions. We are subject to government litigation and regulatory activity that affects how we design and market our products. As aleading global software maker, we receive scrutiny from government agencies under U.S. and foreign competition laws. Some jurisdictions also provide private rights of action for competitors or consumers based on alleged anti-competitive conduct. Forexample, we have been involved in the following actions. Lawsuits brought by the U.S. Department of Justice, 18 states, and the Districtof Columbia in two separate actions were resolved through a Consent Decree that took effect in November 2001 and a Final Judgment entered in November 2002. These proceedings imposed regulatory constraints on our Windows operating system businesses,including limits on certain contracting practices, required disclosure of certain software program interfaces, limits on Microsoft s ability to ensure the visibility of certain Windows features in new PCs, and required licensing of certaincommunications protocols. Although we believe we currently are in full compliance with the Decree and Judgment, if we fail to comply with them in the future additional restrictions could be imposed on us that would adversely affect our business. In March 2004, the European Commission determined that we must create new versions of Windows that do not include certain multimediatechnologies, many of which are required for certain Web sites, software applications and other aspects of Windows to function properly, and we must provide our competitors with specifications for how to implement certain communications protocolssupported in Windows. Microsoft has appealed both determinations to European courts. As a result of the Commission decision, we have incurred and will (absent a reversal of this ruling) continue to incur duplicative development costs. The Commissionruling obligates Microsoft to make available specifications for certain Windows communications protocol technologies on licensing terms that are closely regulated by the Commission. The availability of these licenses may enable competitors todevelop software products that better mimic the functionality of Microsoft s own products which could result in a reduction in sales of our products. Pending resolution of Microsoft s appeal, there will remain uncertainty about the legalprinciples that govern product design issues for future releases of Microsoft products in Europe. In February 2006, the Korean Fair TradeCommission ( KFTC ) completed an investigation of whether including streaming media technology or instant messenger technology in Windows, or including Windows Media Services as an optional component of Windows Server, violates the KoreanFair Trade Act. The KFTC ruled that we had violated the law and issued a remedial order requiring us to offer two versions of Windows PC operating systems, one with Windows Media Player and instant messenger removed and another with thosefunctionalities but also including opportunities for OEMs to install competing media player and instant messaging programs. If upheld on appeal, these remedies could adversely affect the utility and competitive position of Windows PC operatingsystems in the Korean market. We believe our integrated approach to delivery of product innovation benefits consumers and business.Current or future government regulatory efforts and court decisions may hinder or delay our ability to provide these benefits thereby reducing the attractiveness of our products and the revenues that come from them. Moreover, there always remainsthe risk of new legal action, either by these or other governments or private claimants including with respect to products or features that haven t been scrutinized or been the subject of 33 Table of Contents objections in the past. The outcome of such legal actions could adversely affect us in a variety of ways, including: Our online offerings are subject to government regulation of theInternet domestically and internationally in areas such as user privacy, data protection, and online content. The application of these laws and regulations to our business is often unclear and sometimes may conflict. Compliance with theseregulations may involve significant costs or require changes in business practices that result in reduced revenue. Noncompliance could result in penalties being imposed on us or orders that we cease conducting the noncompliant activity. Our business depends largely on our ability to attract and retain talented employees. Our business is based on successfully attracting andretaining talented employees. The market for highly skilled workers in our industry is extremely competitive. We are limited in our ability to recruit internationally by restrictive domestic immigration laws. If we are less successful in ourrecruiting efforts, or if we are unable to retain key employees, our ability to develop and deliver successful products and services may be adversely affected. Delays in product development schedules may adversely affect our revenues. The development of software products is a complex and time-consuming process. New products and enhancements to existing productscan require long development and testing periods. Significant delays in new product releases or significant problems in creating new products could adversely affect our revenue. We make significant investments in new products and services that may not be profitable. We have made and will continue to make significantinvestments in research, development, and marketing for new products, services, and technologies, including Windows Vista, the 2007 Microsoft Office system, Xbox 360, MSN Search, Windows Server, Zune, and Windows Live. Investments in new technologyare inherently speculative. Commercial success depends on many factors including innovativeness, developer support, and effective distribution and marketing. Significant revenue from new product and service investments may not be achieved for anumber of years, if at all. Moreover, new products and services may not be profitable, and even if they are profitable, operating margins for new products and businesses may not be as high as the margins we have experienced historically. Declines in demand for software could occur. If overall market demand for PCs, servers, and other computing devices declinessignificantly, or consumer or corporate spending for such products declines, our revenue will be adversely affected. In addition, our revenue would be unfavorably impacted if customers reduce 34 Table of Contents their purchases of new software products or upgrades to existing products because new product offerings are not perceived as providing significant newfunctionality or other value to prospective purchasers. We are making significant investments in Windows Vista and the 2007 Microsoft Office system. If these products are not perceived as offering significant new functionality or value toprospective purchasers, our revenue and operating margins could be adversely affected. We have claims and lawsuits against us that mayresult in adverse outcomes. We are subject to a variety of claims and lawsuits. Adverse outcomes in some or all of the claims pending against us may result in significant monetary damages or injunctive relief against us that could adverselyaffect our ability to conduct our business. Although management currently believes that resolving all of these matters, individually or in the aggregate, will not have a material adverse impact on our financial position, results of operations, orcash flows, the litigation and other claims are subject to inherent uncertainties and management s view of these matters may change in the future. There exists the possibility of a material adverse impact on our financial position, results ofoperations, and cash flows for the period in which the effect of an unfavorable final outcome becomes probable and reasonably estimable. We may have additional tax liabilities. We are subject to income taxes in both the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in determining our worldwide provision for income taxes. Inthe ordinary course of our business, there are many transactions and calculations where the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. We are regularly under audit by tax authorities. Although we believe our tax estimates are reasonable, the finaldetermination of tax audits and any related litigation could be materially different from our historical income tax provisions and accruals. The results of an audit or litigation could have a material effect on our income tax provision, net incomeor cash flows in the period or periods for which that determination is made. We may be at risk of having insufficient supplies ofcertain Xbox 360 components or console inventory. Some components of the Xbox 360 are obtained from a single supplier and others may be subject to an industry-wide supply shortage. If a component delivery from a sole-source supplier isdelayed or becomes unavailable or industry shortages occur, we may be unable to obtain replacement supplies on a timely basis, resulting in reduced console and game sales. Components are ordered based on forecasted console demand, so we mayexperience component shortages for the Xbox 360 or, alternatively, excess console inventory that may require us to record charges to cost of revenue. Xbox 360 consoles are assembled in Asia; disruptions in the supply chain may result in consoleshortages that would affect our revenues and operating margins. If our goodwill or amortizable intangible assets become impaired we maybe required to record a significant charge to earnings. Under generally accepted accounting principles, we review our amortizable intangible assets for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may notbe recoverable. Goodwill is required to be tested for impairment at least annually. Factors that may be considered a change in circumstances indicating that the carrying value of our goodwill or amortizable intangible assets may not be recoverableinclude a decline in stock price and market capitalization, reduced future cash flow estimates, and slower growth rates in our industry. We may be required to record a significant charge to earnings in our financial statements during the period inwhich any impairment of our goodwill or amortizable intangible assets is determined, negatively impacting our results of operations. Changes in accounting may affect our reported earnings and operating income. Generally accepted accounting principles and accompanying accounting pronouncements, implementation guidelines, and interpretations for many aspects ofour business, such as revenue recognition for software, accounting for investments, and treatment of goodwill or amortizable intangible assets, are highly complex and involve subjective judgments. Changes in these rules or their interpretation orchanges in our products or business could significantly change our reported earnings and operating income and could add significant volatility to those measures, without a comparable underlying change in cash flow from operations. See Note 1 Basis of 35 Table of Contents Presentation and Consolidation of the Notes to Financial Statements (Part I, Item 1) and Management s Discussion and Analysis of FinancialCondition and Results of Operations Application of Critical Accounting Policies (Part I, Item 2) of this report. We operatea global business that exposes us to additional risks. We operate in over 100 countries and a significant part of our revenue comes from international sales. Pressure to make our pricing structure uniform might require that we reduce thesales price of our software in the United States and other countries. Operations outside the United States may be affected by changes in trade protection laws, policies and measures, and other regulatory requirements affecting trade and investment;changes in regulatory requirements for software; social, political, labor or economic conditions in a specific country or region; and difficulties in staffing and managing foreign operations. Although we hedge a portion of our international currencyexposure, significant fluctuations in exchange rates between the U.S. dollar and foreign currencies may adversely affect our net revenues. General economic and geo-political risks may affect our revenue and profitability. Inflation, softness in corporate information technology spending, or other changes in general economic conditions that affect demand for computerhardware or software could adversely affect our revenue or our investment portfolio. Abrupt political change, terrorist activity, and armed conflict pose a risk of general economic disruption in affected countries or generally and could requirechanges in our operations and security arrangements, thus increasing our operating costs. These conditions may lend additional uncertainty to the timing and budget for technology investment decisions by our customers. Catastrophic events may disrupt our business. We are a highly automated business and a disruption or failure of our systems in the event of amajor earthquake, cyber-attack, terrorist attack, or other catastrophic event could cause delays in completing sales and providing services. Our corporate headquarters, a significant portion of our research and development activities, and certainother critical business operations are located in the Seattle, Washington area, and we have other business operations in the Silicon Valley area of California, both of which are near major earthquake faults. A catastrophic event that results in thedestruction or disruption of any of our critical business or information technology systems could severely affect our ability to conduct normal business operations and, as a result, our future operating results could be adversely affected. Acquisitions and joint ventures may have an adverse effect on our business. We expect to continue making acquisitions orentering into joint ventures as part of our long-term business strategy. These transactions involve significant challenges and risks including that the transaction does not advance our business strategy, that we don t realize a satisfactoryreturn on the investment we make, or that we experience difficulty in the integration of new employees, business systems, and technology, or diversion of management s attention from our other businesses. These factors could adversely affect ouroperating results or financial condition. We have limited insurance. We maintain third party insurance coverage againstvarious liability risks and risks of property loss. Because of the unavailability or high cost of conventional insurance arrangements, we have entered into captive insurance arrangements for the purpose of protecting against possible catastrophicand other risks not covered by traditional insurance markets. As of December 31, 2006, the face value of captive insurance arrangements was $2.0 billion. Actual value at any particular time will vary due to deductibles, exclusions, otherrestrictions, and claims. Although we believe these arrangements are an effective way to insure against liability and property damage risks, the potential liabilities associated with the risks discussed in this report or other events could exceedthe coverage provided by such arrangements. Improper disclosure of personal data could result in liability and harm ourreputation. We store and process significant amounts of personally identifiable information as we offer a large array of products and services to our customers. It is possible that our security controls over personal data, our training ofemployees and vendors on data security, and other practices we follow may not prevent the improper disclosure of personally identifiable information. Such disclosure could harm our reputation and subject us to liability under 36 Table of Contents laws that protect personal data, resulting in increased costs or loss of revenue. Our software products also enable our customers to store and processpersonal data. Perceptions that our products do not adequately protect the privacy of personal information could inhibit sales of our products. Other risks that may affect our business. Other factors that may affect our performance may include: °Item 2. Unregistered Sales of Equity Securities and Use of Proceeds °Items 2(a) and (b) areinapplicable. (c) STOCK REPURCHASES On July 20, 2006, we announced that our Board of Directors authorized a $20 billion ongoingshare repurchase program with an expiration of June 30, 2011. On August 18, 2006, we announced that the authorization for the $20 billion ongoing share repurchase program had been increased by approximately $16.2 billion. As a result, weare authorized to repurchase additional shares in an amount up to $36.2 billion through June 30, 2011. The repurchase program may be suspended or discontinued at any time without prior notice. During the second quarter of fiscal year 2007, werepurchased 205.4 million shares for $6.0 billion under the plan. The transactions occurred in open market purchases and pursuant to a trading plan under Rule 10b5-1. 37 Table of Contents °Item 4. Submission of Matters to a Vote of Security Holders The Annual Meeting of Shareholders was heldon November 14, 2006. The following proposals were adopted by the margins indicated: The following proposals were not adopted by the margins indicated: 38 Table of Contents °Item 6. Exhibits °Items 3 and 5 are not applicable and have been omitted. 39 Table of Contents SIGNATURE Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has dulycaused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned thereunto duly authorized. 40